MMITTEE 


OF SOVIET PUBLIC 


AA 


u 


a 


A AN 


ANTLZIONIST COMMITTEE 
OF SOVIET PUBLIC 
OPINION: 

AIMS AND TASKS 


0802010203 


© Novosti Press Agency Publishing House, 1983 


PRESS CONFERENCE 
OF THE ANTI-ZIONIST 
COMMITTEE OF SOVIET PUBLIC 
OPINION 


The Anti-Zionist Committee of So- 
viet Public Opinion held a press con- 
ference in the press centre of the 
Foreign Ministry on June 6, 1983. 
The questions put by Soviet and 
foreign correspondents were answered 
by Committee Chairman, Colonel Gen- 
eral David Dragunsky, twice Hero of 
the Soviet Union, chief of the higher 
officers’ courses Vystrel, and a mem- 
ber of the Central Auditing Commis- 
sion of the Communist Party; First 
Vice-Chairman of the Committee 
Professor Samuel Zivs, doctor of law 
and a merited scientific worker of the 
Russian Federation; Vice-Chairman 
Mark Krupkin, candidate of science 
(law); Vice-Chairman Yuri Kolesni- 
kov, a member of the Union of Soviet 
Writers; Vice-Chairman Igor Belya- 
ev, doctor of economics and a de- 
partment head at JLiteraturnaya 
Gazeta; members of the committee 
presidium, Academician Martin Ka- 
bachnik, Hero of Socialist Labour 


3 


and a winner of Lenin and State pri- 
zes; Victor Pushkarev, a grinder at 
the Moscow data-processing equip- 
ment plant and a deputy of the Su- 
preme Soviet of the USSR, and Gen- 
rikas Zimanas, editor-in-chief of the 
Komunistas magazine and a_ dep- 
uty of the Supreme Soviet of Lith- 
uania. The press conference was 
conducted by Valentin Kamenev, dep- 
uty head of the Foreign Ministry’s 
press department. 

Below we publish materials of the 
press conference. 

Dragunsky. Comrades, ladies and gentlemen, 

About: one and a half months have passed since 
the founding meeting of the Anti-Zionist Commit- 
lee of Soviet Public Opinion, at which this body 
was elected. It is, indeed, a brief period. But the 
Soviet public and mass media have already shown 
great interest in our work and in the fact that 
such a committee has been founded. The establish- 
ment of the Anti-Zionist Committee has also 
evoked interest abroad. 

In this period we have received more than 9500 
letters from Soviet citizens, expressing vigorous 
support for the initiative. A good many letters 
have come from abroad. Soviet and foreign jour- 
nalists have addressed inquiries to the committee. 
This prompted us to hold a press conference to 
explain why and how our organization was set up, 
to outline the aims and tasks of its activity, and 
to answer any questions that might be put. 

How did it all begin? Late in March and early 
in April Soviet newspapers published an appeal by 
a group of Soviet public leaders calling for active 
political unmasking of Zionism, for a more vigorous 


4 


rebuff to the Zionists’ anti-Soviet propaganda, for 
more effective action, and for sponsoring a volunta- 
ry public organization for this purpose. 

The appeal was addressed to workers, collective 
farmers, intellectuals, scientists, writers, art work- 
ers, journalists, to all members of the various na- 
tionalities. Telegrams and letters began to arrive 
almost the day after the appeal was published. 
Our appeal met with keen, I would say, genuinely 
enthusiastic support. This gave us grounds for 
holding the inaugural meeting. We had every justi- 
fication to say that we had been given a public 
mandate, that this broad support was an expression 
of public opinion. This entitled us to call ourselves 
the Committee of Soviet Public Opinion and to 
speak on behalf of the broad Soviet public. 

You may ask why we decided to form the Anti- 
Zionist Committee at this particular time. The 
struggle against Zionism as a dangerous variety of 
capitalist ideology was waged by Lenin as far back 
as the beginning of the century. The Soviet people 
have always regarded Zionism as an ideology which 
advocates the national exclusiveness of the ‘“cho- 
sen people”, and hence as a chauvinistic and racist 
ideology. 

Today imperialism, mainly US reactionary cir- 
cles, are using international Zionism ever more 
actively and widely in pursuance of aims endanger- 
ing peace. As we know, the international situation 
has seriously deteriorated. On the initiative of 
Washington the latter-day crusaders are mounting 
ever new attacks on communism, and no small 
role in this global offensive on the positions of 
peace and progress is assigned to international 
Zionism and the political adventurism of the Israe- 
li ruling circles. The false propaganda and obvi- 
ously slanderous actions of the ideological and po- 


1) 


litical adventurers of international Zionism are part 
of the West’s psychological war against the Soviet 
Union. 

The past year has shown with particular clarity 
that. in its development Zionism, with its misanth- 
ropic ideology and practice, increasingly repro- 
duces the ideas and methods of defeated nazism. 
The events in Lebanon (Israel’s bloody aggression 
against that country began exactly a year ago) 
demonstrated to the whole world that the crimes of 
Begin and his cutthroats differ little from the atro- 
cities committed by the nazis. All this impelled us 
to announce that the time had come for interna- 
tional Zionism to be combated and its anti-Soviet 
propaganda rebutted in a more organized way. 

On this I shall close my brief opening remarks. 
If you have any questions, my colleagues and | 
are ready to answer them. Thank you. 

The “Daily World” correspondent (USA) 
asked the organizers of the conference to comment 
on the American Zionists’ attempts to link criti- 
cism of Israel with anti-Semitism. The chief ob- 
ject of the Zionists’ attacks in this connection was 
the Soviet Union, which they were trying to depict 
as an anti-Semitic state. 

Dragunsky. This is the typical method used by 
Western, Zionist and pro-Zionist propaganda to 
spread misinformation and slander about the Soviet 
Union. It is well known that the Soviet people 
are resolute opponents of chauvinism and national- 
ism in any form, of such nationalistic aberrations 
as anti-Semitism and Zionism. 

Honest people the world over, Jews and non-Jews 
alike, were incensed by the crimes of the Israeli 
military. This is well known. Mass demonstrations 
also took place in Israel. Are such demonstrations 
of protest a manifestation of anti-Semitism? 


6 


The claims that the formation of the Anti-Zion- 
ist Committee of Soviet Public Opinion is a mani- 
festation of some anti-Jewish policy are absurd. 
The myth of the existence of a ‘Jewish ques- 
tion” in the Soviet Union is exploited in order to 
substantiate the threadbare thesis, I would say, one 
of the mainstays of Zionist ideology, about the 
“eternal nature of anti-Semitism”. 

Our committee will fight and is already fighting 
any misleading of people, any attempts to instill 
nationalist prejudices in their minds. Thus we are 
fighting to protect people against the pernicious 
influence of Zionism. 

‘“Trud” correspondent. From what sources is the 
Anti-Zionist Committee financed? 

Krupkin. The committee is a public body and, 
accordingly, its funds will come from contributions 
and subsidies from Soviet public organizations, 
scientific, art, cultural and educational institutions 
and associations, and donations by individual citi- 
zens. 

“I[zvestia” correspondent. J would appreciate a 
more detailed answer to the question as to why the 
struggle against Zionism has become so acute at 
this juncture. 

Zimanas. The reactionary, aggressive trend of 
Zionism is today more evident than before. Zion- 
ism emerged at the end of the last century as the 
ideology of the big Jewish bourgeoisie, and is today 
the official doctrine of the state of Israel, determin- 
ing its aggressive expansionist policy in the Middle 
Kast in the interests of US imperialism. The pol- 
icy of Zionism—which is responsible for the ag- 
gressive wars and the genocide at Sabra and Sha- 
tila—with its pathological hatred of everything 
Soviet, has become utterly revolting. The insistent 
and arrogant claims of the subversive Zionist radio, 


7 


which provocatively alleges that well-nigh “all” the 
two million Soviet Jews dream of emigrating to 
Israel while the remaining 269 million citizens of 
the USSR “oppress” and ‘‘persecute” their Jewish 
compatriots, arouse the indignation of Soviet peo- 
ple. 

Any brand of nationalism—Zionism or anti-Sem- 
itism, German racism or the racist policy of the 
white minority in South Africa—is harmful and 
dangerous. Any talk about the superiority of the 
white, black or yellow race over the other races is 
criminal. Talk of this kind is particularly danger- 
ous for mankind when it becomes the official ideo- 
logy of a reactionary regime which relies on the 
support of international imperialism and seeks to 
achieve its aims by force of arms, shedding the 
blood of innocent people. 

The Zionists are irked by the fact that all Soviet 
citizens, Jews included, love their homeland, their 
Soviet system won in October 1917 and defended 
at the cost of 20 million lives during the Great 
Patriotic War of 1941-45. The Zionists hate the So- 
viet Union as an obstacle to the realization of their 
designs. This makes Zionism incompatible with So- 
viet patriotism and the socialist internationalism of 
Soviet citizens. 

Correspondent of “Golos Rodiny”’ (Voice of the 
Homeland). What can you say about the decline in 
emigration from the Soviet Union? 

The “Los Angeles Times” correspondent asked 
whether the desire of Soviet Jews to emigrate to 
Israel or any other country was regarded in the So- 
viet Union as a betrayal and, if so, why. 

Zivs. I shall try to answer both questions at once. 
You see, juggling with figures is something that 
has long been widely practised by Zionist propa- 
ganda. Now they say that 50,000 and then that 


8 


700,000 Jews want to emigrate from the Soviel 
Union. In a book I read recently I saw mentioned 
the figure of 383,528 Jews wishing to leave. I well 
remembered that figure. From where, it may be 
asked, are these figures taken? It is not the actual 
number of people who have applied for permis- 
sion to emigrate that is counted but the numbers 
planned by the Zionist demographers, if one may 
call them that. For instance, 100,000 invitations 
are sent from Israel, and it is immediately an- 
nounced that 100,000 people want to emigrate. How 
is this done? On the pretext of “reuniting fami- 
lies”, invitations of this kind are mailed to people 
who have never had relatives in Israel. Sometimes 
invitations are sent even to nonexistent Soviet cit- 
izens, or several invitations are sent to one and the 
same person. In the few weeks since the establish- 
ment of the Committee it has received indignant 
letters from Soviet citizens enclosing “official” 
invitations of this kind, official in the sense that 
they bear the red seal of a notary public and an 
accompanying letter from the Israeli Foreign Min- 
istry asking for a humanitarian attitude to family 
reunion and naming relatives who do not in fact 
exist. This is one aspect of the matter. 

Here is another. We are indeed aware that in 
1982 and this year the number of persons emig- 
rating from the Soviet Union has considerably de- 
creased, which, I emphasize, means a decrease in 
the number of persons who apply for permission 
to leave. 

For a number of years after the war reunification 
was the chief motive prompting Soviet citizens 
of Jewish nationality to emigrate. You know that 
during the war many Jewish families were separa- 
ted, and this served as the basis for applications to 
emigrate. By now, however, most families have been reunited and the number of those who leave 
is naturally diminishing. 

Besides, I believe, fewer people now fall for the 
Zionist bait, become victims of Zionist propaganda 
and leave our country. 

This is enough for pro-Zionist propaganda in the 
West to start spreading the slanderous allegation 
that the Soviet authorities now limit emigration, 
now halt it altogether. Some have even tried to 
link the substantial drop in emigration with the 
formation of our committee. I must add that permis- 
sion to leave is given by competent government 
bodies. Our committee can only explain and help 
Soviet citizens to understand the false and poison- 
ous character of Zionist propaganda and try to 
protect them against it. 

I especially stress this point because our commit- 
tee is already receiving letters full of anxiety, griof 
and despair from former Soviet citizens now living 
abroad. 

I think it is worth quoting from some of these 
letters. Here is one from former Soviet citizen Lu- 
bov Vinkler, now residing in West Berlin. ‘Dear 
comrades, sponsors of the voluntary organization, 
the Anti-Zionist Committee,’ she writes, “I have 
read with great satisfaction your appeal published 
in the newspaper Pravda. I congratulate you on the 
establishment of the committee and wish you suc- 
cess in your work... I am a victim of Zionist pro- 
paganda. For 11 years I have been suffering outside 
my beloved Soviet homeland. ...I am 09 now, a 
physician by profession. I have seen enough and 
suffered enough both in Israel and here. ...I have 
seen the bestial essence of Zionism. .. .Grief, tears, 
hardship, humiliation, complete isolation and lone- 
liness in an alien and disgusting world is my lot. 
What has happened to me is the result of subtle 


10 


Zionist propaganda. The Zionists meddled in my 
life and ruined it.” 

Here is another letter. It came, as you can see by 
the stamps, from Brooklyn, New York. It was 
signed by a group of people. “Having fallen for 
Zionist propaganda we took a suicidal step. ... We 
were simply idiots, we did not understand what we 
were doing by leaving our only homeland,” they 
write. I shall not read the whole letter. It has many 
hitter, very bitter pages. “We are utterly mise- 
cable. We are suffering the torments of hell,” says 
this letter written on behalf of several families. Its 
authors express confidence that “the Anti-Zionist 
Committee will defend the Soviet Jews from the in- 
trigues of Zionism and imperialism in general and 
will help... in all justice to prevent people from 
going abroad to be doomed to misfortune.” This 
wording implies that permission to leave the Soviet 
Union means dooming people to misfortune. 

In the question put by the Los Angeles Times 
correspondent the word betrayal is underlined. I 
think you have understood from my reply that when 
the members of a family are reunited, when pa- 
rents are, indeed, reunited with the children they 
lost. during the war, there is no question of be- 
trayal. But when lying Zionist propaganda en- 
snares a person, I, as a lawyer, would say it is an 
unpatriotic act incompatible with our moral princip- 
les and disapproved of by Soviet society and by the 
absolute majority of the Jewish citizens of our 
country. 

‘‘Sovetskaya Rossia” correspondent. Are people of 
different nationalities involved in the Anti-Zionist 
Committee? 

Pushkarev. Our appeal to the Soviet public con- 
tained a call to people of different nationalities to 
take part in the work of the committee, and very 


Pig 11 


many people responded to this call. At the inaugu- 
ral meeting Russians, Jews, Ukrainians and repre- 
sentatives of other nationalities were elected to the 
committee. It is the internationalist duty of all men 
and women of good will to expose Zionism, its ide- 
ology of extreme nationalism and chauvinism, of the 
brigandage and genocide practised by the Israeli 
ruling circles in the Middle East. 

The Anti-Zionist Committee includes prominent 
scientists—Academicians Martin Kabachnik and 
Theodor Oizerman, and Vladimir Kudryavtsev, Cor- 
responding Member of the Soviet Academy of Sci- 
ences, noted cultural workers, composer Matvei 
Blanter, actress Angelina Stepanova and film direc- 
tor Tatiana Liosnova; representatives of work col- 
lectives in Moscow and the Moscow Region—Alexei 
Marinich, chairman of the 22nd CPSU Congress 
Collective Farm in Kolomna district, and Galina 
Golubeva, of the Bratsevo poultry farm. Among the 
committee members are well-known writers Gen- 
rikh Gofman, Tsezar Solodar, Yuri Kolesnikov and 
poets Aron Vergelis and Andrei Dementyev. As you 
see, the composition is truly international. 

Correspondent of the “Peace and Progress” radio 
station. One of the main themes of the provocative 
assembly “in defence of Soviet Jews,” held in Je- 
rusalem in March this year was the allegation that 
Soviet Jews are discriminated against in the field 
of education and science. Will you comment on 
this? 

Kabachnik. Zionist propaganda has always been 
noted for brazenness and has never stopped at jugg- 
ling with facts. To begin with, in the Soviet 
Union universal secondary education is compulsory 
for all children irrespective of their nationality, 
sex or property status. All children, Jewish includ- 
ed, receive an education, and this means that there 


12 


is no, nor can there be, any discrimination in this 
field. Neither is there any discrimination at the 
next stages of education (secondary technical and 
higher), since in the level of education the Soviet 
Jews hold one of the first places among the nation- 
alities of the Soviet Union. Furthermore, it may 
be confidently asserted that Soviet Jews have a high- 
er educational level than Jews in all other coun- 
tries. 

Let us take the highest level. A considerable 
number of Soviet Jews are distinguished scientists 
elected to the Academy of Sciences, the highest 
scientific body in the country. This has been so 
throughout the years of Soviet government. It may 
be recalled that in 1920 Abram Ioffe, an outstand- 
ing physicist and head of the Soviet school of phy- 
sics, was elected to the Academy of Sciences. He 
was soon followed by Alexander Frumkin, head of 
the Soviet school of electrochemistry, a_ brilliant 
scientist of world renown, and a number of other 
Jewish scientists. Many Jewish scientists have been 
elected to the Academy of Sciences in the postwar 
years. Among them are physicist Vitaly Ginzburg, 
crystallographer Boris Wainstein, physicist Ilya 
Frank and his brother Gleb Frank, a biophysicist, 
biochemist Alexander Braunstein and physicist Ar- 
kady Migdul. The list could be continued. Besides, 
Academicians Yakov Zeldovich and Yuri Khariton 
have each been three times awarded the title of Hero 
of Socialist Labour. And Zionist propaganda calls 
this discrimination! The same can also be said about 
professors and lecturers at colleges and technical 
schools. Thus, the talk about the discrimination of 
Jews in the field of education is simply a provoca- 
tive invention of Zionist propaganda. 

The correspondent of the Cable News Network 
(USA) observed that the state of Israel has a right 


18 


to exist, while any government pursuing a policy 
similar to nazi policy cannot have such a right. In 
this connection he asked whether the Anti-Zionist 
Committee would urge the Soviet government to 
change its policy towards Israel or whether it 
would call on the Soviet government to support 
those elements in the. Arab world who consider that 
Israel should not exist as a state. 

Zivs. If I have understood the question correctly, 
it implies roughly the following. We say that the 
Israeli government is employing methods used by 
the nazis: At the same time the official and repeat- 
edly expressed view of the Soviet government is 
that Israel has a right to exist. But if Israel is a 
nazi state, it should not have such a right. Have | 
understood you correctly? Let us separate the two 
aspects of the question. When the state of Israel 
was established, the Soviet delegate in the United 
Nations and at a recent press conference in this 
building Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko reaf- 
firmed the Soviet government’s official view, which is 
supported by the Soviet public, namely the state 
of Israel has a right to exist. At the same time we 
say—and this was especially borne out by the bar- 
barous aggression against Lebanon—that the Israe- 
li ruling circles and the Israeli military have com- 
mitted and are committing crimes similar to those 
perpetrated by the nazi invaders. The methods now 
used by the Begin government strongly remind the 
methods used by the nazis, who fought to gain 
Lebensraum for themselves. 

The inquiries repeatedly carried out by interna- 
tional commissions, which included among others 
the Bishop of Stockholm, Queen’s Counsel John 
Platts-Mills of Britain and Belgian Professor 
Paulette Pierson-Mathy, have shown that the crimes 
of the Israeli military are similar to those of the 


14 


nazis. The question was repeatedly raised of bring- 
ing to account those who inspired these crimes and 
who perpetrated them. 


We are not talking about any abolition of Israel. 
We are talking about the responsibility of its rul- 
ing circles and the ending of its aggressive, expan- 
sionist policy, which threatens peace in the Middle 
East and runs counter to the interests of the Israe- 
lis themselves. 

Belyaev. In your question you allege that the 
Soviet Union only in words supports the right of 
Israel to exist but in. reality backs up those Arab 
circles that are against its existence as a state. This 
is not so. It was here, at the press conference above 
mentioned, that Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko 
pointed out that the Soviet Union does not support 
extremist Arab circles which oppose the existence 
of the state of Israel. 

Moscow Radio correspondent. Will the letters the 
Anti-Zionist Committee has received be published? 

Krupkin. Our Committee has received a great 
many letters. Some of them were published the other 
day in /zvestia, part of them, I repeat only a small 
part, have been included in the booklet Supported 
by the Soviet People. 


The UPI correspondent (USA) asked what role 
the Jewish autonomous region with its centre Bi- 
robidjan played at the present time. 


Belyaev. The establishment and development of 
the Jewish autonomous region in the Khabarovsk 
Territory, in the east of the Soviet Union, was a 
successful experiment. The participants in this press 
conference might be interested to learn that not a 
single person of Jewish nationality has emigrated to 
Israel from this region during the almost 50 years 
of its existence. 


15 


Zimanas. Some time ago I visited the Jewish au- 
tonomous region as a member of a delegation. My 
chief impression was that relations of friendship 
and brotherhood among Jews and non-Jews pre- 
vailed there. The first secretary of the regional Party 
committee is a Jew, and many factory managers 
are Jews. The signboards of all government institu- 
tions are pointed in Jewish and Russian. 

The population of the region lives like one big 
family. The region can boast not only of economic 
successes but also of achievements in the field of 
culture: it has a Jewish theatre company, which 
often tours different cities, including Moscow. It 
will soon move into a new theatre. 

Danish television correspondent. I understand 
that you maintain that anti-Zionism and anti-Se- 
mitism are two different concepts. But do you rule 
out the possibility that anti-Zionism could be used 
as a convenient cover for anti-Semitism? 

Zivs. We have resolutely and categorically repea- 
ted at this press conference, and are prepared to 
repeat again, that all Soviet people and Soviet so- 
ciety as a whole are strongly, emphatically opposed 
to chauvinism, nationalism, and such nationalistic 
aberrations as anti-Semitism and Zionism. You 
know quite well that Zionist propaganda tries to 
label as anti-Semitism any criticism of the ideology 
and political practices of Zionism. 

‘“Komsomolskaya Pravda” correspondent. In con- 
nection with some details made public when the 
case of the nazi butcher Barbie was investigated, I 
would like to ask whether the facts of contacts 
between nazi criminals and Zionists are known io 
you. 

Kolesnikov. Such facts are of course known to 
us, and I shall tell you about them. During the 
war I happened to be stationed deep in the rear of 


16 


the Nazi troops, whither I had been sent by the So- 
viet command. I saw what was happening in the 
nazi-occupied territory. 

Adolf Hitler sent his SS gruppenfuehrers, gaulei- 
ters, generals and other butchers a laconic but 
meaningful directive: Only one Jew must remain... 
but merely as an exhibit! It should be noted that 
the nazi cutthroats carried out the Fuehrer’s dia- 
bolic order efficiently, methodically and punctually. 

I want to point out here that during the war the 
Soviet command concentrated on rescuing people 
of any nationality and religion, including Jews, 
from the death threatening them in nazi captivity. 
Our courageous underground fighters and guerril- 
las, often at the cost of their own lives, saved the 
unfortunate people, hid them in safe places and in 
the forests. 

In those incredibly difficult times, when the 
thoughts of all honest people of the world were 
concentrated on how to defeat the “Brown plague”’ 
as soon as possible and save mankind from nazism, 
the leaders of international Zionism, who assumed 
the right to call themselves “defenders of the 
Jews’, were in no way concerned with protecting 
the Jews who were languishing and dying in the 
nazi death camps. The Zionist leaders were preoc- 
cupied only with building up a numerical superio- 
rity of Jews over the Arab population of Palestine. 
And this at a time when it had already become 
known how the nazis set about “solving the Jewish 
problem”. That is why the leaders of international 
Zionism should be put in a pillory for their wrong- 
doings in the Second World War. 

That is why today we justly can pass the most 
severe judgement on Zionism. This would be abso- 
lutely correct, fair and objective, for in those terrible 
times the leaders of international Zionism not only 


failed to protect the Jews but even betrayed them by 
colluding with Gestapo and SS chiefs. 

Proof of this is the activity in Berlin of the ‘Pa- 
lestine office” headed by Levi Eshkol, one of the 
leaders of international Zionism who later became 
Premier of Israel. 

Levi Eshkol and his assistants ransomed from 
SS chiefs rich Jews who had performed “special 
services” for Zionism. Numerous facts testify that 
Mr. Eshkol’s office refused to help even rich Jews 
who did not share the Zionists’ views. They were 
doomed, together with hundrends of thousands of 
other Jews and non-Jews, to death in the nazi cre- 
matoriums. 

What is more, Eshkol’s ‘Palestine office” co- 
operated directly with the notorious SS Ober- 
sturmbannfuehrer Adolf Eichmann, head of the 
fourth department at the Reich Security Head Of- 
fice. This co-operation was “fruitful” for both 
sides. It is in place to mention here, for example, 
the case of Rudolf Kastner, which caused a sensa- 
tion not only in Israel but also outside it. This 
emissary of the Zionist “Action Committee” with 
“broad powers” had not only “business” but, I 
would even say, cordial relations with Adolf Eich- 
mann. 

It was not by chance that after the war Zionist 
sleuths went out of their way to find Adolf Eich- 
mann so that he would not be caught by agents of 
another country and the secret Zionist-nazi allian- 
ce come to the knowledge of the world public. 

And this could have happened. This nazi butcher 
was responsible for the extermination of people 
of different nationalities from many countries, in- 
cluding Soviet citizens, and of course prisoners of 
war. 

It is also characteristic that the Zionist leaders 


18 


of Israel have not yet added their voice to the de- 
mand for the extradition and punishment of the 
nazi criminals who have found refuge in the Uni- 
ted States. 

As the saying goes, ‘tell me whom you are de- 
fending and I'll tell you what kind of a person 
you are’. 

I think this much is clear to everyone: who is 
who. The cited facts do not give a complete answer 
to the question you have asked, but I] am sure we 
will have an opportunity to continue our discus- 
sion on this subject. 

Novosti Press Agency correspondent. Do Zionist 
doctrines influence Israel’s foreign policy? 

Belyaev. Undoubtedly. Zionist doctrines not only 
influence but also determine Israel’s foreign policy. 
Izrael was established a little over 35 years ago 
and during this short period it has fought SIX 
wars! 

Zionist doctrines—the doctrine of Greater Israel 
from the Nile to the Euphrates among them—play 
a decisive role in shaping Israel’s policy on the oc- 
cupied Arab territories and towards neighbouring 
countries. 

Wide currency has been gained by the doctrine of 
the “original homeland” of the Jews, which existed 
in ancient times and which must now be restored, 
the theory of the ‘historical right” on the basis of 
which the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have been 
declared “liberated” territories and the Palestinian 
Arabs are denied their legitimate national rights 
for the sole purpose of justifying the annexation of 
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Begin con- 
siders this only a question of time. 

As for other Zionist doctrines they insist on re- 
carving the political map of the Middle East in such 
a way that Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and even Egypt be 


1/.3* 19 


partitioned into small states. Begin and his govern- 
ment are against defining the state. borders of Is- 
rael on the grounds that they do not exist at all. 
According to the “Greater Israel’’ plan, the borders 
must be flexible and will be set depending on fur- 
ther territorial expansion. 

On May 17 the press published our committee 
statement concerning the Lebanese-Israeli agree- 
ment. The statement points to the shackling char- 
acter of the agreement imposed on Lebanon by Is- 
rael and the United States. In our opinion, this 
agreement is merely a smoke-screen designed to 
conceal the real aims of Israeli policy. The pur- 
pose is to prepare’ a new war against the Arabs. 

“Al-Watan” correspondent (Kuwait). What is 
your attitude to the just struggle of the Palestinian 
people under PLO leadership for the establishment 
of a democratic Palestinian Arab state? What do 
you think of Reagan’s “‘peace plan’? 

Belyaev. I do not think the first question calls for 
a detailed reply. The Soviet Union has always 
supported and supports the just struggle of the Pa- 
lestinian Arabs for their national rights and their 
own state. The legal basis for the establishment 
of such a state is, in our opinion, the UN resolu- 
tion of November 29, 1947, which stresses the need 
to divide the former mandate territory of Palestine 
into two states—Arab and Jewish. The Jewish state 
came into being on May 14, 1948. The Arab Pa- 
lestinian state has still not been set up. But this 
does not mean that the Palestinian Arabs have lost 
the right to establish it. We maintain vigorous re- 
lations with the Palestine Liberation Organization. 
The Soviet Union’s stand of principle has been for- 
mulated in the relevant documents. We regard the 
PLO as the only lawful representative of the Arab 
people of Palestine. 


20 


ittee of 


ist Comm 
iet and foreign correspondents 


ion 


Z. 


ion for Sov 


iet Public Opin 


At a press conference held by the Anti- 
Sov 


SPSS 


peta RP AO CTELIIASAEE 


RAVAN 


coerce trntlte Tt lClCCLLLFEPTEPCEEFE 


cA 

4 

) 

% 
a 
4 , 


At the press centre of the USSR Foreign Ministry on June 6, 
1983. 


Pe i) peri &. 
CCLP ele 


Bfige es yer Ee Gh 
d het # cee 


i 
2 Py 2 fatentr™ — 
Bite ~ rages gem gy ; : ; 
Lee f eg? bh 


yet t 
. Cea? 
ae os i; Spogeegmenery ge Bias © pA RPE a ze 
é ee bs toh pug 
y 4 << 


reg aap ¢ p 


| a ee | 


pews eh 
| eYWOe sy “\ 


¥ eatin 


au 
OB yas AL 
os ows A ay 
ya pany 


wot 


, BVL Wott 
ey a e 
Bane he aa 
by Aaaty ersawt 4 


ite pagar CO 
nosh Pe “s\ 


if Hi nat 


Letters from abroad addressed to the 
Anti-Zionist Committee of Soviet Public 
Opinion. 


eos aid Bx 16 hye 
rues comes OXyEETE BB OS 


— Cee axsott ane? 


ie HO py Taser BBR s 


ba Pe 


cA 


and First Vice-Chairman: Samuel Zivs, D. Sc. (Law). 


Ethel Klinger, correspondent of the newspaper Zo Haderech 
published by the Israeli Communist Party. 


Committee Vice-Chair- 
man Mark Krupkin, 
Cand. Sc. (Law). 


Committee Vice-Chair- 
man lIgor Belyaev, 


D. Sc. (Economics). 


Committee Vice-Chair- 
man Yuri Kolesnikov, a 
member of the Union of 
Soviet Writers. 


re 
3 
$ 


A Yiddish primer published 
in Khabarovsk in 1982. 


The Old Testament—the 
Five Books of Moses—in 
Hebrew with parallel Rus- 
sian text, published by the 
Religious Society of the 
Moscow Choral Syna- 
gogue. 


As regards the second question, Reagan’s ‘‘peace 
plan” mentions some sort of association of the West 
Bank with Jordan. But the plan does not explain 
exactly what kind of association is proposed, and 
the cardinal problem of the Middle East conflict— 
the Palestinian problem—is in effect disregarded. It 
seems to me that the purpose of this plan, ad- 
vanced on September 14 last year, at the height of 
the war in Lebanon, was to divert attention from the 
Israeli aggression and crimes in that country, and 
not to bring about a comprehensive and just settle- 
ment. As for the strategic US-Israeli agreement, 
it is the real alliance on the basis of which the two 
countries in fact jointly fought in Lebanon and are 
now preparing for a war against Syria. 

The ‘Daily World” correspondent asked General 
Dragunsky to comment on the role the Soviet Jews 
had played in the Great Patriotic War against 
fascism and on the role of the Soviet Army in 
saving millions of Jews from death in gas chambers. 

Dragunsky. In the Red Army Jews fought against 
the nazis side by side with soldiers and officers of 
other nationalities. About 200,000 Jews were killed 
in battle, valiantly fighting in the front lines. Many 
thousands of Jewish servicemen were decorated for 
their valour in action. More than 120 Jews were 
awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. The 
Soviet Union pays homage to the heroism of its 
men who fought in the Great Patriotic War. 

I was in the Osowiec fortress when the war be- 
gan. For 1,418 days and sleepless nights I fought 
on many battle fronts. The brigade I commanded at 
the end of the war included representatives of some 
30 nationalities, and all of them fought for our 
common homeland. They did not ask what your 
nationality was— Russian, Kazakh, Jewish or Lett- 
ish. They shared a common aim, that of defeating 


21 


racism and fascism as quickly as possible and 
winning freedom for our homeland. Victory in the 
war was won by the single multinational family 
of the Soviet peoples. 

I would like to mention one more thing. Every 
year on May 9 we all celebrate Victory Day. That 
day is officially observed in many countries, but 
not in Israel. 

The historic victory over nazi Germany, the de- 
feat of fascism, is not observed in Israel as an of- 
ficial holiday. The Zionist leaders’ pathological 
hatred of the Soviet Union does not allow them to 
recognize its historic contribution to the victory 
that foiled the barbarous nazi plans of exterminat- 
ing all “inferior races”, the Jews included. 

Correspondent of ‘Zo Haderech”, paper of the 
Israeli Communist Party. What methods does your 
committee expect to use in its work and will it is- 
sue a concrete programme? My second question is 
to Comrade Belyaev. I know that he has recently 
returned from Israel, where he attended Victory 
Day celebrations. Perhaps he would say a few 
words. 

Krupkin. Vl answer to your first question. The 
Presidium of the Committee has recently approved 
its plan which outlines various undertakings aimed 
at exposing Zionism and the schemes of imperial- 
ism. In the plan we have used many of the pro- 
posals contained in the letters addressed to the 
Committee. 

Belyaev. As a member of a delegation of three 
I attended the celebrations in Israel to mark the 
38th anniversary of the victory over nazi Germany. 
I must stress that these were not official celebra- 
tions, although they have become traditional, or- 
ganised by progressive forces in the country. 


22 


In defiance of the government attitude, more than 
10,000 people gathered in Red Army Wood near 
Jerusalem. The first part of the ceremony consisted 
of laying flowers on the modest memorial to those 
who fell and perished in the Second World War. 
This was followed by a rally. The ceremony pro- 
vided proof that there are forces in Israel which 
openly declare their belief that history must not be 
forgotten and oppose fresh military adventures. The 
ceremony was also a protest against the war with 
Lebanon and against the plans, which have already 
been announced in Israel, to declare war on Syria. 

The most remarkable fact about the speeches 
made at the rally was the theme, common to them 
all, that the crimes similar to those committed by 
the nazis during the Second World War should 
never be allowed to happen again, whatever pre- 
text for them anti-communism and anti-Sovietism 
might claim to find. I was also interested to see 
that both Jews and Arabs attended the rally, de- 
monstrating that Jews and Arabs can live together 
peacefully in the Middle East. 

It was a rally held in protest against the doctrines 
which are used by all those in Israel who want to 
launch a fresh war against Syria, attack Jordan and 
redraw the political map of the Middle East. 

Moscow Radio correspondent. Zionist propagan- 
da is trying to persuade the Western public that 
the rights of citizens of Jewish nationality are in- 
fringed in the Soviet Union. Would you comment 
on this? 

Zivs. The attempt to raise a “Jewish question”’ 
in the Soviet Union is an element of the psycholog- 
ical warfare waged against our country. In this 
connection I should like to draw your attention to 
the fact that the Western press is systematically 
flooded with slander about the discrimination 


23 


against Jews in the Soviet Union. Books: specially 
devoted to this question are regularly put out. Here 
are two such books recently published in France. 
One of them is entitled Anti-Semitism in Russia 
from Its Sources to Our Days and the other To Be 
a Jew in the USSR. Incidentally, both books 
have been brought out by a prestigious, I would 
say, academic publishing house, University Press. 


The book To Be a Jew in the USSR contains figu- 
res, tables, calculations and notes. All that it lacks 
is. the truth. Let us look at, say, page 86. It says 
that the teaching of religion to children is punish- 
able even by death under Article 119 of the Crim- 
inal Code. See for yourselves what Article 119 of 
the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation says. 
It provides for punishment for the sexual abuse of 
children. 


Here is another example. The complete works of 
Lenin, republished in 1964, the book says, did not 
include a speech delivered by him in 1919. That 
speech was directed against anti-Semitism, but now 
this fact is allegedly hushed up. If you take Vol- 
ume 38 of the collected works, you will find in it 
that speech in which Lenin explains that hostility 
towards the Jews is stirred up by the capitalists of 
all countries with the object of diverting the at- 
tention. of the workers of all nationalities from 
their real enemies. 


Here are a few more examples. The author of the 
book claims that all plays staged in Moscow theatres 
have an anti-Semitic slant. He cites instances. 
I think even foreign journalists have seen Mikhail 
Bulgakov’s play On the Run. There is also a screen 
version. This dramatic play, giving a broad picture 
of the retreat of the routed White Guard troops 
from the Crimea and their flight to Constanti- 


24 


nople, is declared anti-Semitic on the grounds that 
a minor character, one Artur Arturovich, the cock- 
roach king, organizes cockroach races in Constan- 
tinople, and one of his remarks shows that he is a 
Jew. 

‘For more than half a century not a single edi- 
tion of the Bible has been published in Hebrew 
in this country,” the book says. Here is the 1979 
edition of the Old Testament—the Five Books of 
Moses—in Hebrew with the parallel Russian text. 
It was published by the Religious Society of the 
Moscow choral synagogue. 

‘Neues Leben’ correspondent. The Western 
press often alleges that the teaching of Hebrew is 
banned in the Soviet Union. More than this, He- 
brew is called the national language of the Soviet 
Jews. What is the real state of affairs? 

Zimanas. Hebrew has never been the national 
language of the Jews either in tsarist Russia or in 
the Soviet Union. Yiddish is that language. At pres- 
ent about 14 per cent of the Soviet Jews consider 
Yiddish their mother tongue. 

As for the Hebrew language, revived and adap- 
ted to the present conditions in Israel, it is taught 
in Soviet colleges which train philologists and 
orientalists, for instance, at the Institute of Asian 
and African Countries of Moscow University, and 
in the Tbilisi and Leningrad universities. 

I shall not dwell on the fact that the Zionist 
leaders lay special emphasis on the introduction af 
Hebrew. They would like Hebrew to be studied 
and adopted as the common language of their wide- 
ly advertised single “world Jewish nation”. Heb- 
rew is also seen by the Zionist leaders as an instru- 
ment that would help to spread Zionist ideology. 

But to return to Yiddish. It can be stated with 
all responsibility that the Zionist self-styled ‘‘cham- 


20 


pions of Jewish Soviet culture” are absolutely in- 
different to Yiddish, the national language of the 
Soviet Jews. Do you know of any Western publish- 
ing house which would be prepared to reprint the 
books of Soviet Jewish authors writing in Yiddish 
or at least to bring out an anthology of works in 
Yiddish published in the Moscow journal Soviet- 
ish Heimland? Do you know of a single Western 
firm that would be prepared to put out records of 
Jewish songs sung in Yiddish by Iosif Kobzon or 
Galina Kareva? Would any leading Western news- 
paper—from Le Monde to the New York Times— 
report on this fine Yiddish Primer, approved by 
the public education department of the Jewish au- 
tonomous region and published in Khabarovsk im. 
1982? 


Why is all this hushed up? Because if it were 
made public, the true purpose of the ‘defence of 
Jewish culture in the Soviet Union” would become 
clear to everyone in the West. 


Correspondent of “La revue des relations inter- 
nationales” (Belgium). In Belgium there are some 
prominent Jews, university lecturers in particular, 
who expose Israel and Zionism. Of course, they 
work in very difficult conditions, under the pres- 
sure of Zionist propaganda. Does your committee en- 
visage cooperation with prominent Jewish people 
in other countries, who do not accept Zionist views? 


Zivs. I believe that in the process of its further 
work our committee will establish contacts with 
various national and international organizations 
which expose Zionism, its ideology and policy. 

Editor of “Politiken” (Denmark). You say that 
you and your committee speak in support of the 
existence of the state of Israel. Yet it is known 
that the ideological basis of Israel is Zionism. How 


26 


can one fight Zionism and still support the exi- 
stence of the Israeli state? 

Zivs. | think you know our fundamental position 
quite well: we favour the development of normal 
relations with many states whose ruling circles and 
parties hold ideological positions unacceptable to 
us. But that is not to say that at the present time 
we are prepared to take a similar approach to Is- 
rael, because its government adheres to positions 
of military adventurism, aggression, racism and ex- 
pansionism. 

‘‘Moscow News’ correspondent. Immigration to 
the “promised land” has lately tended to tail off, 
and a surge of emigration trends is observed in 
Israel itself. Does this not testify to a crisis of Zion- 
ism? 

Zivs. I believe we can speak not simply of a cri- 
sis of Zionism but of the collapse of one of its 
principal concepts—the idea of “gathering all Jews 
in the land of Israel”. What is actually happen- 
ing? Over the years of the existence of Israel 
roughly 1.5 million people have moved there from 
all parts of the world and roughly 600,000, or a 
third, have emigrated or simply fled from it. Is this 
not a new ‘exodus’? 

Among the reasons which impel people to leave 
that country are galloping inflation (135 per cent 
last year—something of a record in the capitalist 
world), the atmosphere of chauvinist hysteria, the 
pressure of religious circles, and, lastly, the state of 
permanent war in which no family knows whom it 
will lose in a new aggressive venture. The Israeli 
parliament is now discussing the question of impos- 
ing sanctions on those who try to leave the coun- 
try. | would say that this is eloquent testimony to 
the fact that the “promised land’ myth has col- 
lapsed. 


SUPPLEMENT 


IN SLANDEROUS FURY 


An interview given by David Dragunsky, Chairman of the 
Anti-Zionist Committee of Soviet Public Opinion, on June 
21, 1983, to Sovietskaya kultura. 


The setting up of the Anti-Zionist 
Committee of Soviet Public Opinion 
brought on a fit of anti-Soviet hysteria 
in Washington. Setting the tone for 
this slanderous campaign were Presi- 
dent Reagan, the State Department 
and some members of Congress who 
made crude verbal attacks on the So- 
viet Union in an attempt to distort the 
substance of the Leninist nationali- 
ties policy of the Soviet Communist 
Party. They are trying to present So- 
viet criticism of Zionism and the con- 
demnation by Soviet public opinion of 
Israel’s aggressive policy as part of an 
anti-Semitic campaign in the USSR. 

A TASS news agency reporter asked 
Colonel General David Dragunsky, 
twice Hero of the Soviet Union, 
Chairman of the Anti-Zionist Com- 
mittee, what he thought of Washing- 
ton’s reaction to the setting up and 
activities of the Anti-Zionist Com- 
mittee of Soviet Public Opinion. 


31 


These malicious attacks by Washington--and 
that they would come was only to be expected—- 
show the extreme irritation of the Zionist camp and 
its patrons. Reflecting the will of the Soviet peo- 
ple, our committee has set out to expose the reac- 
tionary nature of Zionism as a concentration of 
extreme nationalism, chauvinism and racial intol- 
erance, as a cult of political permissiveness and 
adventurism, unbridled demagogy and underhand 
attacks, dirty manoeuvres and the worst kind of 
treachery. There is nothing accidental about the 
fact that in its global strategic offensive against so- 
cialism and the national liberation movements, 
against the forces fighting for peace and social pro- 
gress, the imperialists, headed by the United States, 
are making the widest possible use of interna- 
tional Zionism as a striking force. This is why the 
intensification of our struggle against Zionism and 
against its reactionary ideology and criminal prac- 
tices arouses such hostility in the more aggressive 
circles of imperialism, to say nothing of the Zion- 
ist rulers themselves. 

Characteristically, though silent about the true 
motives of our committee and its aims (which 
have been widely covered in the media of this 
country and abroad), the conductors of the bour- 
geois propaganda orchestra have failed to invent 
anything original and are only repeating their worn- 
out cliches. 

A. Romberg, a State Department official, for one, 
has made sweeping accusations against the Soviet 
Union, calling it “anti-Semitic”. This dirty method 
has been resorted to by the ideologists of Zionism 
and its advocates throughout the entire history of 
international Zionism and it does not make it any 
more convincing. I would like to recall here that 
when Bruno Kreisky, the former Chancellor of Au- 


32 


stria and one of the leaders of the Socialist Inter- 
national, was accused of precisely that, he repli- 
ed, and quite reasonably: “This is a stupid accusa- 
tion. I am Jewish, but I am not a Zionist, because 
Zionism is nationalism in its extreme form.” 

Soviet people are profoundly indignant at the ef- 
forts of the Zionist rulers and their benefactors in 
Washington’s present administration to usurp the 
right to act as would-be ‘‘defenders” of Soviet Jews, 
while at the same time heaping the most blatant 
slander on our Soviet homeland, its history and 
reality, falsifying the nationalities policy of the 
Leninist party. This indignation has been voiced in 
thousands of letters which we have been receiv- 
ing from all parts of this country. 

Soviet people, and this has been amply proved 
by the entire history of our multinational social- 
ist state, are true internationalists and they reject 
all forms of chauvinism, including Zionism and 
anti-Semitism. Those are the principles which also 
underlie the activities of our committee. 

In a bid to mislead world public opinion these 
gentlemen draw their arguments from the venom- 
dripping slanderous writings by renegades of va- 
rious kinds who are in the pay of the American 
and Israeli special services. And, of course, they are 
not satisfied with the true and widely accessible 
facts that, for example, the Soviet Union, 0.67 per 
cent of whose population are Jewish, has more col- 
lege students of Jewish nationality than Israel. 
Thousands of Jews have been elected Deputies to 
local and central government bodies, the Soviets, 
alongside people of other nationalities, and many of 
them hold high government posts. 

The transatlantic slanderers, by the way, have 
been caught out many times, and one can only 
wonder how some of the high-ranking officials in 


33 


the Washington Administration scem never to tire 
of playing the same old record over and over again 
in the hope of making political dividends. All the 
more because if they were really concerned about 
“the position of the Jews,” they could easily find 
grounds for their concern not in far-off lands, but 
right there at home. There are plenty of facts that 
show militant anti-Semitism flourishing in the Unit- 
ed States with the full connivance of the authori- 
ties. Discrimination in jobs, the existence of clubs 
from which Jews are barred, acts of arson and ex- 
plosions in synagogues, the desecration of Jewish 
cemeteries, the daubing of swastikas on Jewish 
homes, the manhandling of adolescents—all these 
have become a feature of the American way cf 
life. According to USA Today, the number of anti- 
Semitic attacks against individual citizens and 
against Jewish organizations has increased more 
than eight times over in the past three years. 
Last year, 947 such incidents were recorded. Things 
have gone so far that even schoolchildren in the 
State of Massachusetts have set up “an organiza- 
tion of Americans hating Negroes and Jews’. Who 
gave the US authorities, who allow such savagery 
in their own country, the right to act as guardians 
of morals and teach others how they should best 
observe human rights? 

I would also like to point out that the US State 
Department was particularly irritated by the mate- 
rials which were recently presented by our com- 
mittee at a press conference, proving that the chau- 
vinist ideology of modern Zionism and the crimi- 
nal political practice of the ruling circles of Israel 
virtually amount to a repetition of the racialist 
ideas and man-hating deeds of the nazis. Mr. Rom- 
berg referred to this comparison as “an immense 
distortion of history and the truth”. 


34 


So much for this official’s knowledge of history 
and his judgement of the truth. I would like to 
recall a well-known truth which the men in Wash- 
ington seem to be anxious to expunge from the 
memory of mankind. The atrocities that the Israe- 
li military perpetrated in Lebanon and are still 
perpetrating on the occupied Arab lands and for 
which the ruling elite of Tel Aviv and the leaders 
of international Zionism are directly responsible, 
have caused an explosion of anger and indignation 
all over the world. Prime Minister Andreas Pa- 
pandreou of Greece has called Israel a fascist state, 
while the London journal Middle East Internation- 
al considers the Israeli regime to be akin to the 
fascist dictatorships in Latin America. 

In Israel itself more and more often voices can 
be heard denouncing the adventurist policy of the 
Begin government. In reply to all this persecution 
of the democratic forces in that country is becom- 
ing increasingly merciless and brutal. Washington 
and Tel Aviv both fear this rapid growth of pro- 
gressive democratic sentiment. They are afraid of 
protest actions against the expansionist policy of 
the Israeli rulers. That is why the transatlantic po- 
licy-makers are trying so hard to cover up the ad- 
venturism of Zionism and its plunderous practices 
by attacking our committee. 

But just as, in the words of Shalom Aleichem, 
a classical Yiddish author, “you cannot sew a 
scullcap from a sow’s ear’’, so the US advocates and 
defenders of Zionism cannot whitewash the latter 
by an exercise in slander. 


WHAT DO THE ZIONISTS WANT? 


Mark Krupkin, Vice-Chairman of the Anti-Zionist Com- 
mittee of Soviet Public Opinion, replies to a letter of an 
American reader, Tlenry Goldstein, sent to the magazine 
New Times. The tletter was published by the magazine on 
July 8, 1983, 


I have two questions to raise in 
connection with the recent founding of 
the Anti-Zionist Committee in the So- 
viet Union. First, is this not an ex- 
pression of anti-Semitic sentiment in 
your country? Second: Israel is at war 
with the Arabs, but how can the Zio- 
nists present a threat to such a great 
power as the Soviet Union? 


Henry Goldstein, 
New York, USA 


The Zionists indeed tried to present the establish- 
ment of the Anti-Zionist Committee of Soviet Public 
Opinion as the beginning of an “anti-Semitic cam- 
paign in the USSR”. Voice of Israel and Voice of 
America broadcasts promptly bégan to call for the 
creation of a new Zionist organization to take the 
lead in mounting an offensive against our commit- 
tee. 

Our committee is anti-Zionist, not anti-Israel. We 
are for peace in the Middle East, and for the ex- 
istence of Israel as a state. When we voted for its 
establishment, it was a peaceful Israel and not an 
aggressive state that we voted for. We know that 


36 


in Israel itself there are forces that oppose Zion- 
ism, its ultra-reactionary, aggressive policy. The re- 
cent 100,000-strong demonstration in Tel Aviv is 
the best proof of this, not to speak of the coura- 
geous struggle waged by the Israeli Communists. 


The fiction that “anti-Semitism is eternal” occu- 
pies an important place in the anti-Soviet propa- 
ganda of the West. It is persistently claimed that 
there is anti-Semitism in our country and the fact 
that there is no “Jewish question” in the USSR is 
totally ignored. The position the Jews actually oc- 
cupy in socialist society shows that we not only 
have successfully resolved the economic and social 
problems involved but have created conditions that 
completely rule out any possibility of preaching 
national discord. In particular, we have overcome 
that shameful legacy left behind by tsarism, anti- 
Semitism. 


Let me remind you that the Zionists began their 
auti-Soviet activity in the very first days of So- 
viet government. A secret Zionist conference held 
in Moscow on May 2, 1918, adopted a programme 
which declared that “Zionism and Socialism are 
not only two mutually repellent poles, but two mn- 
tually exclusive elements”. 


Anti-Sovietism and anti-Communism are official 
policy in Israel. As far back as the early 1970s 
the then Prime Minister Golda Meir proclaimed a 
‘total campaign” of international Zionism against 
the USSR. Tactics “of psychological influence” was 
worked out involving the organization of anti-So- 
viet meetings, seminars and symposiums with the 
participation of renegades expelled from the social- 
ist countries. The World Zionist Organization sys- 
tematically spends on this unprecedented drive two 
thirds of its 700-800 million dollars annual budget. 


37 


Persuading Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel is 
all but the main objective of anti-Soviet propa- 
ganda. A special role in this is allotted to Zionist 
information media as well as the Voice of Ameri- 
ca, the BBC, Deutsche Welle, Radio Liberty and 
Radio Free Europe. The so-called “Jewish question 
in the USSR” is standard fare in the broadcasts of 
the last two. The purpose of all this is to discredit 
the nationalities policy of the CPSU and the So- 
viet government, to undermine faith in the spiri- 
tual values of socialism, and to expunge internation- 
alism from people’s thinking. Futile. though these 
efforts are, the Zionists stubbornly persist in them. 

The Zionist provocateurs are especially infuriated 
by the fact that the overwhelming majority of So- 
viet citizens of Jewish origin reject with indignation 
the exhortations of the self-appointed Tel Aviv pat- 
rons to return to “the land of their forefathers”. At 
the recent international conferences “in defence of 
Soviet Jewry” the Zionists tried to make it appear 
as if the decline in Jewish emigration from the So- 
viet Union were the result of ‘‘a clamp-down by 
the authorities’. Yet the unquestionable fact is 
that the number of Soviet Jews prepared to believe 
the Zionists has sharply dropped. Besides, it should 
be noted that more and more of those who did 
emigrate are applying to the Soviet authorities for 
permission to return to the USSR. Our committee 
too has received a great many such requests. 

While paying lip service to “freedom of infor- 
mation” and “free exchange of ideas,” the Zionists 
actually have in mind freedom to spread their. chau- 
vinist, racist ideology, to which end attempts are 
being made to smuggle anti-Soviet publications into 
our country. The luggage of a US citizen named 
Morris Fine, who came to Moscow with his wife 
for the International Book Fair, was found to con- 


38 


tain hundreds of copies of anti-Soviet publications 
in Russian, and catalogues of American Zionist 
book publishers. A similar instance is the case of 
Laurence Ackermann, resident of Paris, who was 
supplied before leaving for a trip to the USSR with 
a stack of anti-Soviet printed matter and instructed 
in detail how to conceal it from customs inspection 
and to deliver it to the addressees. 

Not infrequently the Zionists exert direct pressure 
on US politicians and officials to induce them to 
make pro-Zionist statements. For instance, they 
persuaded President Reagan to give his assurances 
that the “Jewish question” would figure in all talks 
with the Soviet Union. In deference to them Rea- 
gan made some crude sallies against the Soviet 
Union also in connection with the founding of our 
committee. The President’s example was followed 
by some Congressmen and spokesmen of the US 
State Department. Pronouncements of this order 
are prompted primarily by domestic political consid- 
erations, which impel many prospective candidates 
for high office to seek the support of the Zionist- 
controlled press. 

I hope that the above facts make it clear to you 
that Zionist propaganda is not only reactionary, 
but subversive in character: it is directed against 
the Soviet Union. 


AHTHMCHOHUCTCKHH KOMHTET COBETCKOM 
OBWULECTBEHHOCTH: 
HEH H 3AQAUN 


Ha aAHPJIHAHCKOM s3bIKe 
LlenHa 15 kon. 


: 
SANSA 

NSN SRO RNS 

Lanse: SSeS: ae 

Seat 


