ZIONISM: 
INSTRUMENT 


OF IMPERIALIST 


REACTION 


Soviet Opinion on Events 
in the Middle East and the Adventures 
of International Zionism 


(March—May, 1970) 


ZIONISM: 
INSTRUMENT 
OF IMPERIALIST 
REACTION 


et OE ke 


Soviet Opinion on Events 
in the Middle East and the Adventures 
of International Zionism 


(March-May, 1970) 


Novosti Press Agency Publishing House 


I, 


II. 
ITI. 


CONTENTS 


Soviet People Demand that Israeli Aggressors and World 
Zionists Stop Their Provocations 

Indignant Reply to Zionists 

Protest and Condemnation 

End the Crimes! 

Wrathful Indignation 

The Myth of the “Promised Land” 

Servant to Imperialist Reaction. An Instrument of Mass-Scale 
Blackmail and Deceit 

Zionism, a Tool of Imperialism 

Class Essence of Zionism 

The Poison of Zionism 

Zionism Without Masks 

The “Great Israel’’ Bluff 

Secret Servants of Zionism 

The Octopus’s Tentacles 

Fascism under the Blue Star 


. SOVIET PEOPLE DEMAND THAT 
ISRAELI AGGRESSORS AND WORLD 
ZIONISTS STOP THEIR PROVOCATIONS 


The criminal actions of the Israeli milit- 
ary and the extremist policies of Tel Aviv 
evoke great indignation among the Soviet 
people. 

The Israeli rulers are taking the path of 
aggression and chauvinism when they claim 
the right to “represent” all the Jews. The 
provocative calls of Golda Meir and her 
henchmen for Soviet Jews to leave the So- 
viet Union and go to Israel have evoked the 
anger of Soviet citizens of Jewish nationa- 
lity, as well as of all Soviet people. 

Below are letters by Soviet citizens 
which have been published in the Soviet 
press, and which condemn Zionist, anti-So- 
viet provocations and demand an end to 
Israeli aggression and the establishment of 
a just peace in the Middle Kast. 


REBUFF TO PROVOCATEURS 


The world public is alarmed over the actions of the 
Israeli military aided and abetted by US imperialist circles. 
Tel Aviv rulers are whipping up war hysteria in the Middle 
East and continue to bomb peaceful Arab towns and vil- 
lages. Moshe Dayan’s air hawks have recently bombed the 
iron plant at Abu Zaabal (near Cairo) causing the death of 
dozen of innocent people. 

The reckless adventurism of the Israeli rulers who show 
utter disregard for human rights has aroused universal anger 


and indignation. Israeli occupationists have flouted the UN 
Declaration of Human Rights, the Geneva Convention on 
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the 
UN Security Council resolution of November 22, 1967. They 
are also hampering a peaceful settlement of the Middle East 
conflict. 

The aggressors are set on intimidating the peaceful Arab 
population by criminal acts of violence. But here they mis- 
calculated! Progressives throughout the world are on the 
side of the Arab peoples and support their just struggle. 
We approve wholeheartedly the Middle East policy of the 
Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet Government. We 
demand that Israeli aggressors stop immediately their crimi- 
nal actions. 

The provocative propaganda campaign launched by 
Israel’s rulers and international Zionist organizations fills us 
with indignation. We know that Zionist organizations publish 
more thana thousand periodicals. In Europe they put 
out 158 newspapers and magazines and in the USA— 
954 newspapers and magazines. They openly conduct rabid 
anti-Soviet propaganda. We are resolutely against the ex- 
port of Jewish bourgeois nationalism. 

Not long ago, Prime Minister Golda Meir announced 
in parliament that Tel Aviv would see to it that Soviet citi- 
zens of Jewish nationality “returned” to Israel, their sup- 
posed motherland. This is an open anti-Soviet move. We 
wonder who gave Golda Meir the right to be our spokes- 
man? There is nothing in common between us and the Tel 
Aviv bosses. 

The present writers are all Jewish by nationality. We 
reject with indignation the statement of the Israeli Prime 
Minister. Nobody has conferred on her the right to insult 
and humiliate Soviet citizens. Stop interfering in other peo- 
ple’s affairs, Mrs. Meir. Our native land is the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics. We know of no better mother- 
land. We defended her, arms in hand, with other nationali- 
ties of the USSR, in the years of the Great Patriotic War 
against fascist invaders. We are now building up her might. 

One of the signers to the letter is Y. I. Khavkin. During 
the war he fought at the front and was in Berlin in 1945. 
For his courage and bravery he was decorated with orders 
of the Great Patriotic War (2nd grade), Red Star, and 


the Medal for Valour. For seventeen years now Yakov Iosi- 


6 


fovich Khavkin has been chairman of the “Bolshevik” col- 
lective farm. He enjoys great respect among the people. 
He is a deputy to the Village and the Regional Soviets of 
Working People’s Deputies. In 1966, he was awarded the 
nation’s. highest decoration, the Order of Lenin. The col- 
lective farm he heads is among the most efficient in the area. 

Every person in the Soviet Union has ample opportuni- 
ties for development. L. Gurvich is a Candidate of Engineer- 
ing Sciences, designer of the flax combine harvester. He 
has won several medals of the All-Union Exhibition of 
Economic Achievements. 

It is unthinkable for us to live outside the Soviet Union. 
One can only be happy by living in one’s native land. We 
have never been to Israel and do not need the protection 
and care of its leaders. The Soviet Government and the 
Soviet Communist Party, to which we all belong, display 
every concern for us. We are pained to learn that Israel has 
followed in the wake of fascist criminals. Golda Meir and 
her fascist-like friends have committed evil deeds of the 
type committed by the Hitlerite murderers. We shall never 
be able to forget the horrors of war. We paid dearly for 
our victory. Fascists murdered Khavkin’s parents and his 
sister and her three-year-old child; in the city of Zhdanov 
they tortured to death Vestfried’s mother, father, sister and 
brother. These were crimes committed by German fascists. 
But what about the crimes now being perpetrated on Arab 
soil? The actions of Israeli aggressors are of the same order 
as those committed by Hitlerites on occupied territories. 

May we tell Mrs. Meir that Soviet Jews have never ac- 
cepted Zionist ideology. May we tell the Israeli aggressors 
and their US imperialist bosses that the Soviet people, no 
matter of what nationality, are rallied around the Soviet 
Communist Party and the Soviet Government. We shall 
never betray our motherland—the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics. 


Yakov KHAVKIN, chairman of the “Bolshevik” col- 
lective farm; David EFROS, chairman of the Kali- 
nin collective farm; Lev GURVICH, Candidate of 
Engineering, chief of a designing laboratory; Schma- 
rya VESTFRIED, department chief of an engineer- 
ing plant, secretary of the plant’s Party Bu- 
reau; Boris MAGIDOV, engineer at the All-Union 
Scientific-Research Institute on Flax 

Torzhok area, Kalinin region 

Selskaya Zhizn, March 1, 1970 


AGGRESSORS SHALL BE PUNISHED 


With indignation we follow the developments in the 
Middle East. The growing tension there is due to the ag- 
gressive actions of Israel’s ruling quarters which are trying 
to retain the territories they seized from the Arab coun- 
tries. 

One is disgusted as one reads reports on escalations of 
bombings of peaceful towns and villages in Egypt. These 
wanton, barbarous cruelties committed for the purpose 
of intimidation cannot be justified. The Hitlerites gained 
nothing by daily bombing and shelling Leningrad. They 
failed to force the city’s residents to their knees. The war 
waged by the US imperialists in Vietnam and Laos also 
shows that such vile methods are ineffective; they turn 
against those who apply them. 

Tel Aviv rulers ignore the resolution of the UN Secu- 
rity Council of November 22, 1967 on cease-fire and the 
withdrawal of troops from occupied territories; they pay 
no heed to the demands of the world public for an end to 
the aggression. They seem to forget that today internatio- 
nal issues can no longer be settled by force of arms and that 
abettors to aggression and their accomplices are bound to 
receive their due. 

We approve and support the policies of our govern- 
ment and its efforts to ensure the peace and security of na- 
tions, to give effective aid to victims of aggression and op- 
pose imperialist interference in the affairs of countries with 
progressive regimes. 

We resent and condemn the attempt of Golda Meir to 
encroach on the rights of Soviet citizens of Jewish nationa- 
lity. Her “concern,” however, is obviously of a provocative 
character. All Soviet people of our multi-national country 
are linked by bonds of friendship, enjoy all the privileges 
and rights of the citizens of this great socialist country and 
are patriots of their motherland. We fully support our pro- 
gressive social system which is a pioneer in the develop- 
ment of human society. In this society which put an end 
to the exploitation of man by man, great strides have been 
made in science, engineering and culture and the achieve- 
ments of the scientific and technical revolution are used 
for the benefit of man and all mankind. We take pride in 


8 


our motherland and Party which proclaimed that man is 
friend and comrade to his fellowmen and which educates 
the people of our country to be Leninist internationalists, 
champions of peace and friendship among peoples and help- 
ers to developing nations. 

We have made a great contribution to the defence of 
our motherland against interventionists and aggressors; we 
praise the courageous deeds performed by the Soviet people 
who safeguarded both their country and the whole of Eu- 
rope against fascist enslavement. 

Our lives are devoted to realizing the cherished dream 
of mankind—the building of communism. 


Professor A. KRISS, Doctor of Natural Science, Le- 
nin Prize winner; Professor M. MEISEL, Correspond- 
ing Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences; Pro- 
fessor Y. RAUTENSHTEIN, Doctor of Natural 
Science 

Moskovskaya Pravda, March 10, 1970 


STOP PLAYING WITH FIRE 


The staff of the Central Research Institute of Economics 
under the RSFSR State Planning Committee approve the 
statement on Middle East developments read at a press con- 
ference held on March 4, 1970 for Soviet and foreign jour- 
nalists. (Material on the press conference was published in 
the previous issue of Zionism: Instrument of Imperialist Reac- 
tion, February-March, 1970, Novosti Press Agency Publi- 
shing House, Moscow.) 

“Like all Soviet people, we reject the ludicrous proposal 
of Golda Meir that Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality 
should go to Israel. 

“We, our children and our grandchildren, have been 
reared and educated in the Soviet Union. Our motherland 
is the Land of Soviets; for her well-being we shall spare 
neither effort not energy. 

“Many of us participated in the Civil War, defended 
our motherland in the years of the Great Patriotic War or 
worked in the rear for the victory of our country. The rout 
of fascist Germany saved from extermination and brought 
freedom to many nationalities, including the Jews. 


1B—474 9 


“We are both patriots and internationalists. Like all So- 
viet people, we approve wholeheartedly the Leninist natio- 
nal policy of our Communist Party and government, a poli- 
cy of support for the national and social emancipation of 
nations. 

“Peace must come to the Middle East. Israel must stop 
its policy of annexation and extermination of the peaceful 
inhabitants of Arab countries. The annexationist ambitions 
of Zionists backed by US imperialist circles are opposed 
to the interests of Israeli working people and can only bring 
them misfortune.” 


E. GOFLING, D. BOGORAD, I. KHAIKIN, 
M. GOHBERG, B. STULBERG, G. BRAUN, 
A. LEVIN, E. GILINSKAYA, S. PODOLSKY, 
G. MARYAKHIN, M. KRAKHMALNIK, R. SER- 
BINA, workers at the Central Research Institute of 
Economics under the RSFSR State Planning Com- 


mittee 
Moskovskaya Pravda, March 11, 1970 


CURB THE AGGRESSORS, STOP THE 
CRIMES OF THE ZIONISTS 


We workers in different branches of the national eco- 
nomy, science and culture of the Soviet Ukraine, people of 
Jewish nationality, have carefully studied the reports on 
the press conference held in Moscow on March 4, this year, 
and the statement by a group of public figures, statesmen, 
artists, writers and scientists—Soviet citizens of Jewish na- 
tionality, a statement which resolutely condemns the anti- 
popular policies and criminal activities of the Israeli rulers 
and international Zionism, encouraged and supported by 
US imperialism. We give our wholehearted support to this 
statement which reflects our thoughts and feelings, our great 
indignation with the imperialist Zionist plot against the 
peoples of the world. 

We condemn the flagrant provocations of Tel Aviv. We 
cannot remain silent as the Israeli cutthroats commit out- 
rages in the Middle East, killing peaceful inhabitants—old 
people, women and children, as the rulers of Israel resort 
to outright political subversion by slandering our Soviet 


10 


homeland, the Leninist national policy and the brotherly 
friendship of the peoples of our country. 

We who have signed this letter grew up and are at pre- 
sent working in the Ukraine. We are well aware of the dis- 
graceful part played by Zionist leaders in the years of the 
Civil War when they collaborated with Denikin and Pet- 
lyura, with Pilsudski and Wrangel, with the organisers of 
the bloody Jewish pogroms. We are well aware of the fact 
that in the years of the nazi occupation they collaborated 
with the Hitlerites and condemned their “fellow” Jews to 
torture and death. The tragedy of Babi Yar will always 
remain a symbol not only of the cannibalism of the nazis, 
but also of the disgraceful activity of the Zionists, their 
accomplices and followers. 

We are proud of the unbreakable bonds that united the 
famous Sholom Aleichem to the Ukraine, proud of the fact 
that he did not consider any other country except Russia 
to be his homeland. We are proud that the Ukraine is the 
homeland of such writers as Mendele Moicher Sforim, Ber- 
gelson and Perez who dreamed of the day when “the Jew 
would feel himself a human being.” After the Great Octo- 
ber Socialist Revolution, Jewish working people did start 
to feel like human beings, for the first time in history. We 
are proud that Jewish working people, together with Rus- 
sians, Ukrainians and other nationalities of our country, 
selflessly fought, under the guidance of the Bolsheviks, for 
the abolition of social and national oppression, for Soviet 
power. 

As a result of the victory of the October Revolution and 
the building of socialism all the nations and nationalities 
in our country have acquired real freedom and happiness 
and a homeland. The so-called “Jewish problem,” which in- 
veterate Zionists are still trying to rake up, no longer exists 
in our country. For us it is hard even to imagine what sort 
of miserable and oppressive life we would have had were 
it not for the Communist Party, Soviet power and the 
friendship of peoples! 

The signatures that appear below show perhaps better 
than words that here in the Ukraine, as elsewhere in the 
Soviet Union, people of Jewish nationality work in all bran- 
ches of economy, in all fields of science and culture, enjoy- 
ing the respect of their colleagues and the rights and bene- 
fits of our socialist society, on an equal footing with all 


Ib* 11 


other citizens. And now the leaders of Zionism “invite” So- 
viet Jews to reject all this in order to serve their inveterate 
enemies—the Israeli “‘supermen,” to be turned into cheap 
labour power or cannon fodder for the latter. 

Apparently, you, leaders of Zionism, have a very poor 
understanding of Soviet people! You know very little 
about our thoughts and feelings, our inner world and way 
of life, our love for our Soviet homeland! We would like 
to tell you that your efforts are in vain. And as to life in 
the “promised land,” meaning capitalist Israel, we are well 
informed about it and know very well, from the letters sent 
by the few who were unfortunate enough to trust you, that 
it is not paradise but a real hell for working men. 

And now suddenly you have developed a feeling of 
“love” for Soviet Jews. Who gave you the right, Mrs. Meir, 
to show concern for us Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality? 
Your provocative “calls” to treason, to betray our real 
homeland evoke in us only a feeling of anger and scorn. 
Here is our reply: Soviet Jews have always had only one 
homeland—the Soviet Union, of which they are proud and 
to which they are devoted. We have no intention to change 
our homeland. Incidentally, being as mercenary as you are, 
you will not be able to understand this—you have always 
been vicious enemies of Arabs, Jews and working people of 
all nationalities, and now you are more eager than ever to 
serve the darkest forces of imperialism. 

We demand that an end be put to the senseless and ag- 
gressive policy of the rulers of Israel in the Middle East. 
We fully support the just liberation struggle of the Arab 
peoples and the efforts to eliminate the consequences of 
the Israeli aggression. 


I. Y. BARENBOIM, Candidate of Engineering, di- 
rector, bridge building trust No. 1, Hero of Socialist 
Labour, Merited Builder of the Ukrainian SSR, Sta- 
te Prize winner; M. A. YASLINOVSKY, Member, 
USSR Academy of Sciences; S. Y. BRAUDE, Mem- 
ber, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences; A. Z. ASTRA- 
KHAN, Director, Selidovugol trust, Deputy of the 
Donetsk Regional Soviet of Working People’s Depu- 
ties; I. N. SHAMO, composer, Merited Artiste of the 
Ukrainian SSR; L. B. GRABIN, director, “Ukrkabel” 
plant, Kiev; E. E., OPALOVA, People’s Artiste of the 
Ukrainian SSR; Professor A. A. GRANDO, Doctor 
of Medicine; M. I. GRABSKY, Hero of the Soviet 
Union, department chief, “Ukrglavsyrie,” Glavsbyt, 


12 


Ukrainian SSR; I. G. TELMAN, writer; M. L. GRIN- 
BERG, steel worker, the Petrovsky metallurgical 
plant, Dnepropetrovsk; M. B. ROZIN, Merited Ar- 
tiste of the Ukrainian SSR; Y. B. DAVIDZON, press 
photographer, Radzyanska Ukraina newspaper; Co- 
lonel A. A. SHIRMAN, Candidate of Philosophy, 
senior instructor, Artillery Academy, Kiev; Professor 
B. I. SHVETSKY, Doctor of Engineering; Professor 
N. P. FLEISHMAN, Doctor of Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences; E. L. ZVYAGILSKY, chief, mine 
No. 13, Kuibyshev coal trust, Donetsk region; 
I. S. SHTEIMAN, Merited Artiste of the Ukrainian 
SSR, conductor of the Lysenko Opera and Ballet 
Company in Kharkov; R. M. SIMONOVA, director, 
Chernovtsy glove factory; A. B. SOROKIN, Hero of 
Socialist Labour, chairman, 20th CPSU Congress col- 
lective farm, Konstantinovsky district, Donetsk re- 
gion; V. M. GOPNIK, Hero of the Soviet Union, ci- 
nema director, Lvov; M. A. KATSNELSON, blast 
furnace foreman, the Kirov metallurgical plant, Ma- 
keyevka; Y. B. FAINBERG, Associate Member, Uk- 
rainian Academy of Sciences; Professor A. Y. GLAU- 
BERMAN, Doctor of Mathematical and Physical 
Sciences, director, Physical Research Institute, Odessa 
University; S. S. FACTOROVICH, worker, ‘“Lenin- 
skaya Kuznitsa” shipyards, Kiev; M. Y. FRIDEL, 
journalist; Y. V. MEITUS, composer, Merited Ar- 
tiste of the Ukrainian SSR; M. I. BLAIVASH, cap- 
tain of the “Admiral Ushakov;” I. S. FALIKHMAN, 
writer; G. P. RATNER, works superintendent, bridge 
building group No. 2, State Prize winner; I. A. SNIT- 
KOVSKY, State Prize winner, chief engineer for the 
construction of a_ bridge over the Dnieper river; 
D. B. ZELDOVICH, editor, Dovzhenko Film Studio, 
Kiev, Merited Cultural Worker of the Ukrainian SSR; 
K. P. POLYAKOV, chief, planning and financial de- 
partment, committee for the press, Council of Minis- 
ters of the Ukrainian SSR; P. Y. ZITZER, worker, 
Chernovtsy clothes making factory No. 3; S. I. LE- 
VIT, lecturer, Kiev branch, the Lenin Central Mu- 
seum; B. N. YESELSON, deputy director, Physico- 
Technical Institute of Low Temperatures, Ukrainian 
Academy of Sciences; Professor A. M. UTEVSKY, 
Doctor of Natural Science, Associate Member, Ukrai- 
nian Academy of Sciences, Kharkov Medical Insti- 
tute; R. N. BALYASNAYA, poet; E. A. GAIDIKO- 
VICH, chief, economic planning department, “Glavs- 
byt,” Ukrainian SSR; Professor L. E. BERENSH- 
TEIN, Doctor of History; I. I. PAIN, artistic direc- 
tor, Lvov Philharmonic Society, Merited Artiste of 
the Ukrainian SSR; D. L. KLEBANOV, composer, 
Merited Artiste of the Ukrainian SSR; Professor 
M. G. KREIN, Associate Member, Ukrainian Acade- 
my of Sciences, Odessa Civil Engineering Institute; 


13 


A. I. BASHKOV, Master of Engineering, director, 
“Dongiprouglemash” Institute, Lenin and State Prize 
winner; M. A. OSHEROVSKY, director, Musical Co- 
medy Company, Merited Artiste of the RSFSR; 
L. I. BUGALO, actress, Russian Drama Company, 
People’s Artiste of the Ukrainian SSR; Professor 
I. I. GIKHMAN, Associate Member, Ukrainian Aca- 
demy of Sciences, department chief, Donetsk Com- 
puting Centre, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences; 
A. I. AKHIEZER, Member, Ukrainian Academy of 
Sciences; Professor Y. D. KIRSHENBLADT, Doctor 
of Medicine; M. I. KHERSONSKY, manager, Ker- 
menetsky district department of “Selkhoztekhnika”; 
Professor I. M. PEISAKHOVICH, Doctor of Medi- 


cine 
Pravda, March 12, 1970 


AGGRESSION MUST BE STOPPED! 


We veterans of the revolution fought for many years 
under the leadership of the Communist Party founded by 
the great Lenin against the tsarist brutal regime, against in- 
ternal and external counter-revolution and against the 
fascist plague. 

All of us took an active part in the establishment and 
development of the world’s first socialist state, which has 
done away with the exploitation of man by man and the 
oppression of minority nationalities. The Leninist national 
policy has triumphed, and complete equality of all nations 
and nationalities has been established in the USSR. 

Among our comrades are people of different nationalities: 
Russians, Ukrainians, Byelorussians, Latvians, Lithuanians, 
Jews, Armenians, Georgians and persons of other natio- 
nalities in our multi-national Soviet state. 

We fully support the home and foreign policy of our 
Government which tries to eliminate the remnants of co- 
lonial regimes and supports the national-liberation move- 
ment of peoples. 

With anger and indignation we protest against the 
Israeli aggression in the Middle East. 

With the active support of international Zionism, an 
enemy of the countries of the socialist community, and with 
extensive material and military assistance from their impe- 


14 


rialist masters in the United States, Britain and the FRG, 
the Israeli extremists continue to carry out aggression against 
the Arab countries and refuse to fulfil the resolution of 
the United Nations Security Council, withdraw their troops 
from the seized territories, and stop their atrocities against 
the Arab peoples. 

The Israeli Government is pursuing racialist and fascist 
policy in the Middle East. 

We demand that an end be put to the aggression of the 
Israeli rulers who are fanning the flames of war in the Mid- 
dle East and driving the people of their country to catas- 


trophe. 


F. N. PETROV (CPSU member since 1896); Y. V. 
DOROFEYEV (CPSU member since 1907); M. L. GO- 
BERMAN (CPSU member since 1911); C. T. KHAV- 
KIN (CPSU member since 1911); N. S. OGANESOV 
(CPSU member since 1913); A. A. DENISOV 
(CPSU member since 1912); F. I. VENTSKOVICH 
(CPSU member since 1913); N. V. VESELOVSKY 
(CPSU member since 1912); M. P. YEFREMOV 
(CPSU member since 1914); E. A. MIKHEYEV 
(CPSU member since 1914); M. G. ROSHAL (CPSU 
member since 1915); IVANOVA-TERENTIEVA 
(CPSU member since 1915); M. P. KHAVKIN (CPSU 
member since 1916); A. F. KUZOVATKIN (CPSU 
member since 1915); M. I. GARYUTIN (CPSU 
member since 1916); P. G. GLEBOV (CPSU member 
since 1916); M. Y. BABINA (CPSU member since 
1917); K. R. ROMANOV (CPSU member since 1917); 
A. D. MALYSHEV (CPSU member since 1917); 
N. D. CHUGUNKIN (CPSU member since 1917); 
A. A. KRASNOGORSKY (CPSU member since Hue 
E. F. PETUSHKOVA (CPSU member since 1917); 
L. I. ROSENBERG (CPSU member since 1917); 
A. N. DOLIN (CPSU member since 1917); I. N. KA- 
LINKIN (CPSU member since 1917); I. A. SHEF- 
FER (CPSU member since 1917); N. N. KARDA- 
SHEVA (CPSU member since 1917); E. O. YUZH- 
NAYA-MOKHOVA (CPSU member since 1917); 
K. D. LESHCHINER (CPSU member since 1917); 
P. G. TITOV (CPSU member - since cu 
A. B. RYAZANTSEV (CPSU member since 1917); 
V. A. IVANOV (CPSU member since 1917); 
S. A. VELICHKO-OKSMAN (CPSU member since 
1917); A. G. IPATOV (CPSU member since 1917); 
Y. B. LYUBMAN (CPSU member since tery 
E. Y. BARSKAYA (CPSU member since 1917); 
I. A. LABETSKY (CPSU member since 1917); 
I. P. GORYA (CPSU member since 1917); D. Y. ZA- 
ITSEV (CPSU member since 1917); N. F. IZMAI- 
LOV (CPSU member since 1917); N. V. RAPOPORT 


15 


(CPSU member since 1917); V. I. SKOTNIKOV 
(CPSU member since 1917); N. V. AKIMOV (CPSU 
member since 1918); M. G. RAPOPORT (CPSU 
member since 1918); R. T. KHAVKIN (CPSU mem- 
ber since 1919); M. E. VINOGRADOVA (CPSU 


member since 1919) 
Pravda, March 13, 1970 


STOP ESCALATION OF WAR 


The Soviet people denounce the acts of terrorism per- 
petrated by Israel against peaceful civilians in the Arab 
countries. The Israeli aggressors and their US protectors 
must not go unpunished. 

The Israeli rulers trample underfoot the resolutions of 
the UN Security Council and ignore the demand of the 
world progressive public to stop escalation of the war in 
the Middle East. However, their policy is bound to fail. 

History shows that a policy of aggression and race hatr- 
oe such as that conducted by Israel today, is doomed to 
defeat. 

We, workers at the All-Union Scientific-Research Insti- 
tute of Industrial Design, strongly denounce the actions of 
Israeli provocateurs. We believe in the triumph of the just 
cause of the peoples fighting for freedom and independence. 


Y. SOLOVYOV, director of the institute, Candidate 
of Arts; V. MUNIPOV, deputy director, Candidate 
of Psychology; Professor V. ZINCHENKO, Doctor 
of Psychology, A. DIZHUR, chief of the Depart- 
ment of Dissemination of Scientific and Technical 
Information; V. VENDA, Candidate of Engineering 


Moskovskaya Pravda, March 14, 1970 


PROFOUND INDIGNATION 


A press conference for newspaper, magazine, radio and 
TV writers was held at the Riga Friendship House. Soviet 
Jews in the arts and sciences and working in the economy 
of Latvia expressed their indignation at the aggressive ac- 


16 


tions of the Israeli ultras against Arab countries and the 
efforts of Israeli rulers to seem “concerned” about Jews 
living in the USSR. 

The following statement was read at the press confe- 
rence on behalf of the participants: 

In view of the continued aggression against Arab states, 
we, a group of Soviet Jews living in the Latvian Soviet So- 
cialist Republic, protest against the crimes of the Israeli 
military and the ruling extremist circles. 

We also are speaking out in view of the audacity of 
the rulers of Israel, particularly Prime Minister Golda Meir, 
declaring Soviet Jews should emigrate to Israel which is 
supposedly their real homeland. 

It is perfectly clear that, like the war waged by Israel, 
such assertions are the product of imperialist-Zionist plott- 
ing, a result of the policy of international Zionism which 
was and remains a tool of the most reactionary aggressive 
circles. 

Those of us who were born, grew up and lived in Latvia 
well know and remember the harm done by the Zionists to 
the cause of the working class, the cause of the progressive 
intelligentsia; the strife provoked in the struggle of the 
Jewish proletariat, diverting it from the genuine class strug- 
gle; their support of the Jewish bourgeoisie, which, like any 
bourgeoisie, is the oppressor of the working masses. 

We are not surprised that some Zionist leaders who 
came from Latvia hold leading posts in the Israeli Govern- 
ment and are taking an active part in the vile nationalist 
slander against the Soviet Union, the peace-loving policy 
of our Party and Government, are distorting in every way 
the truth about the position of the Jews in the Soviet Union, 
trying to picture the Jews in the Soviet Union as down- 
trodden, persecuted and doomed to a miserable existence. 

Our answer to this is that many Jews living in Latvia 
actively participated in the struggle against the exploiters, 
including the Jewish bourgeoisie. In this struggle they mar- 
ched shoulder to shoulder with Letts and Russians. This 
can be seen from the history of the revolutionary movement 
in 1905, the years of struggle for the victory of the Great 
October Revolution, and during the period of bourgeois 
Latvia. 

A considerable number of Jewish servicemen—privates, 
sergeants and officers—in the 130th Lettish Rifle Corps took 


17 


part in hostilities during the Great Patrivtic War. They 
fought for our true homeland, for the multinational Land 
of Soviets, for the happiness of Soviet Latvia. 

Here are a few figures illustrating the role played by 
Soviet Jews in various aspects of life in Latvia. 

In the Soviets of our Republic 72 deputies are of Jewish 
nationality. There are 80 Jewish scientists in institutes of 
the Academy of Sciences of the Latvian Republic, including 
four with a D.Sc. and 27 with a M.Sc. degree. A number of 
Latvian Jews have won State Prizes of the Republic. Hun- 
dreds of Jews study at the Republic’s higher educational 
establishments. 

We are legitimately incensed at the fuss raised by the 
Pied Pipers of international Zionism to get Soviet Jews to 
move to Israel. 

The multinational Soviet Union is our homeland. It is 
the land of our fathers and forefathers, our children and 
grandchildren. We are devoted to our Party, our Govern- 
ment, we are bound by blood ties forever with the great 
multimillioned, multinational family of Soviet peoples. 

The Leninist national policy is directed against all ma- 
nifestations of chauvinism and nationalism, including Zio- 
nism and anti-Semitism. Our Party is solving the national 
question on the basis of the principles of Marxism-Leni- 
nism and internationalism which vividly express the inte- 
rests of all the working people of the world and attract the 
masses throughout the globe. 

We are in no way moved by the demagogical statements 
of Golda Meir and the other Zionist rulers of Israel but 
we are deeply disturbed by the fact that war continues in 
the Middle East, that young men and women of Israel and 
Arab states are killed, that old folk, women and children 
perish. Completely losing their sense of reality and pru- 
dence, the Israeli military continue this criminal policy to 
suit the US imperialists. 

We demand that the Israeli rulers stop the aggression, 
withdraw from the seized lands and adhere to the resolu- 
tion of the UN Security Council of November 22, 1967. The 
war in the Middle East must be stopped—such is the will 
of the peace-loving peoples, of all men and women of good 
will, including the peoples of our homeland, the Soviet 
Union. The extremists who seized power in Israel and their 
patrons from the USA must know this. 


18 


We Soviet Jews once again emphasize that we fully sup- 
port the peace-loving foreign policy of our Party, of our 
Government. 

Professor A. F. BLYUGER, Doctor of Medicine, Pro- 
rector of the Riga Medical Institute; Assistant Profes- 
sor M. G. VULFSON, Academy of Arts of the Re- 
public; Academician S. A. GILLER, Director of the 
Institute of Organic Synthesis, Academy of Scien- 
ces of the Latvian Republic, State Prizes winner; 
MIKHAIL ZORIN, writer; Assistant Professor 
P. Y. KRUPNIKOV, the Stucka State University of 
Latvia; E. K. PASTERNAK, head of the Depart- 
ment of Museums of Fine Arts and Protection of 
Monuments, Ministry of Culture of the Latvian Re- 
public; K. D. PERMONT, head of the Personnel De- 
partment of the State Vocational Training Commit- 
tee of the Council of Ministers of the Latvian Repu- 
blic; A. A. SHOMSHTEIN, deputy head of the 
Central Material and Technical Supply Board of 
the Council of Ministers of the Latvian Republic; 
Professor R. L. SHUB, Doctor of Medicine, head of 
the Chair of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Riga Me- 
dical Institute 


Pravda, March 14, 1970 


PUT AN END TO CRIMES! 


We Jewish workers in the Hero-City of Kiev, the capit- 
al of the Soviet Ukraine, wrathfully condemn the unceasing 
aggressive actions of the Israeli military against Arab coun- 
tries and indignantly protest the air raids on peaceful towns 
and villages of the UAR, Syria and Jordan. We, who have 
lived through the horrors of fascist barbarism in the years 
of the Great Patriotic War, cannot keep silent when Zionist- 
racialists, following in the footsteps of the nazi-butchers, are 
persecuting and terrorising the Arab population in Israel- 
occupied Arab territories wiping their homes off the face of 
the earth, depriving them of their land and their possessions. 

We fully support the statement issued by a group of 
public leaders and statesmen, by people in the arts, litera- 
ture and sciences on March 4 at a press conference in Mos- 
cow, and the statement published in Pravda on March 12, by 
Soviet Jews, workers in various sectors of the national eco- 
nomy, science and culture of the Soviet Ukraine, denounc- 


19 


ing the criminal actions of Israeli extremists and internatio- 
nal Zionists, inspired by US imperialists. 

As members of a close-knit working family in the world’s 
first socialist state, who have been brought up by the Leni- 
nist Party in a spirit of proletarian internationalism and 
friendship between nations, any manifestations of national- 
ism, chauvinism and racial discrimination are alien to us. 


The history of revolutionary movement in our country, 
including the revolutionary movement in Kiev, provides 
vivid illustrations of how workers of all nationalities, 
shoulder to shoulder, fought autocracy, capitalism, social 
and national oppression. Meanwhile, the Zionists, like all 
nationalists, collaborated with the forces of counter-revo- 
lution and conspired with Wrangel, Denikin, Petlyura, the 
Central Rada and Hetman Skoropadski. 


As part of Russia’s proletariat, Jewish workers fought 
for the victory of the Great October Revolution which put 
an end to the “Jewish pale” and to the “Jewish question” 
once and for all. The doors of big industrial enterprises 
were opened to Jewish workers, they became foremen, high- 
ly skilled workers in leading trades and active builders of 
communism. 


Together with workers of various nationalities engaged 
in Kiev factories and plants, Jewish workers participate in 
implementing the targets set by the 23rd CPSU Congress 
and the 23rd Congress of the Ukrainian Communist Party, 
in endeavouring to carry out the five-year plan ahead of 
schedule and to mark the Lenin birth centenary with fitting 
accomplishments. 

Soviet reality and the status of Jews in socialist society 
fully disprove the slanderous propaganda of the despicable 
Zionists who preach class peace, divert working people from 
the class struggle and whip up national dissent. The work- 
ing class has always come out against nationalism in any 
shape. This is why we reject Zionism which in imperialist 
hands has today become an instrument of struggle against 
democracy, socialism and national-liberation movements. 


We have this to say to the Zionists: don’t worry about 
the lot of Soviet Jews. We have our own homeland—the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Together with all fra- 
ternal peoples, Soviet Jews defended their homeland’s free- 
dom, honour and independence in the struggle against fasc- 


20 


ism. Our life and the future of our children and grandchil- 
dren are connected with the Soviet homeland. 

The International Conference of Communist and Work- 
ers’ Parties in Moscow last year, stressed that the historic 
mission of the working class and all anti-imperialist forces 
struggling for peace, democracy, national independence and 
socialism was to put an end to the criminal actions of im- 
perialism and to curb the aggressors. 

We, the authors of this letter, on behalf of Kiev workers 
of Jewish nationality, resolutely demand that the Israeli 
military stop their aggression and withdraw their troops 
from Arab territories. 

We wholeheartedly approve and unanimously support 
the policy of the CPSU Central Committee and the Soviet 
Government, seeking to create conditions for the peaceful 
settlement of the Middle East crisis. We assure our Com- 
munist Party and Soviet Government that we will spare 
no effort to build up the might of our homeland which, to- 
gether with all peace-loving nations, is actively and consis- 
tently struggling for peace and international security all 
over the world. 

N. I. BOROZIN, mortising-machine operator at the 
“Bolshevik” plant; Z. N. BOIMEL, fitter at a paper 
factory; I. M. BEIGEL, assembly fitter at the “Lenin- 
skaya Kuznitsa” plant; S. I. VINOGRADOV, lathe- 
operator at the “Kievlyanka” knitted-goods factory; 
E. R. VAINSHTEIN, mechanical fitter at a trans- 
port depot; M. I. GROSSMAN, fitter at the ‘‘Kiev- 
pribor” plant; M. Z. GERSHENZON, thread-cutter 
at the “Ukrkabel” plant; L. F. DASHEVSKY, elec- 
tric fitter at a chemical fibre factory; B. M. ELE- 
VICH, fitter; G. A. ZAITSEV, employed at a je- 
welry factory; R. G. ZAVADSKY, driver at auto- 
mobile depot No. 09122; G. Y. ZEIDA, fitter; 
M. B. RONDEL, fitter at the “Remtochmekhanika”’ 
plant; A. S. KAZHDAN, forgesmith at the Lepse 
plant; K. O. KUPER, finishing operator at the Bo- 
zhenko factory; I. Y. KUSHNIRSKY, concrete wor- 
ker at housing trust No. 1; Z. S. KRAMER-MORU- 
KHAI, fitter at the municipal equipment repair plant; 
L. I. LETSKAN, machine-operation instructor at the 
Darnitsa locomotive depot; S. B. PEKUROVSKY, ad- 
justment fitter; E. K. RADOMYSELSKY, | lathe- 
operator at an experimental plant; Y. S. RYBAK, 
quality control inspector; D. E. RAITSIN, electric 
fitter; Y. L. SIGAL, electrical welder of bridge-build- 
ing group No. 2; A. L. TAVER, milling-machine ope- 
rator at the “Torgmash” plant; B. S. FINKEL, lathe- 
operator at the “Rentok” plant; F. A. FRIEDMAN, 


21 


heat-treatment operator at the motor-cycle plant; 
S. F. KHOTINSKY, electrician at the “Transsignal” 
plant; A. I. SHAKHNOVICH, electrician at the Ka- 
linin plant; M. B. SHIMONOVSKY, lathe-operator 
at the “Krasny Rezinshchik” plant; M. I. YUDIT- 
SKAYA, computer operator at the “Glavmekhshchot” 
factory 


Pravda, March 15, 1970 


RETRIBUTION IS INEVITABLE 


We, workers of industrial enterprises, state and collec- 
tive farms in Moscow region, Jews by nationality, resolutely 
protest against the aggressive actions of the Israeli military. 
The situation in the Middle East has been strained for more 
than two years now. The aggressive war unleashed by the 
Tel Aviv war-mongering quarters against the Arab states 
has aroused the wrath and indignation of all progressive 
mankind. Those who cherish peace and tranquillity and en- 
gage in peaceful endeavours cannot remain silent. 

Of course, the Israeli military would not have dared to 
commit such reckless acts against the neighbouring nations 
had it not been encouraged by the imperialists, American 
above all. In their recent statement a number of public and 
state personalities, as well as workers in the fields of art, 
literature and science—Soviet citizens of Jewish nationa- 
lity—resolutely condemned the anti-popular policy and 
criminal activities of the Israeli rulers and international 
Zionism. We adhere to this statement. The aggressors must 
be curbed, and Zionist atrocities must be stopped. Peaceful 
civilians in Arab countries are subjected to bombing. ‘The 
Israeli bandits destroy non-military objects, murder women, 
old folk and children. In so doing they draw on the expe- 
rience of the fascist killers. The Tel Aviv provocateurs 
ought to remember the lessons of history. They will not 
escape punishment for their crimes. 

We are profoundly indignant at the attempts of the Is- 
raeli rulers and Zionist quarters of other countries to speak 
on behalf of all Jews. What right have they to do so? Such 
attempts arouse our wrathful protests. We grew up in the 
Soviet country where we received our education and have 


22 


jobs to our liking. Our children study at schools and col- 
leges. There can be nothing in common between us and 
the Israeli aggressors. We can imagine the urge of the Tel 
Aviv rulers to turn Soviet Jews into cannon fodder and to 
have them pull Israel’s burning chestnuts out of fire, and 
commit robbery on Arab soil. Nothing doing! Mind you— 
Zionist ring-leaders—your schemes are doomed to fail! 
There is no need for us to go to Israel. Each of us has and 
will always have one motherland—the great Land of Sov- 
iets. We are proud of it, and we glorify it by our labour. 
We shall defend it, arms in hand, from the encroachments 
of any aggressor. 

On our own behalf and on behalf of our fellow Jews 
we demand that the aggressors be curbed and all seized 
Arab lands freed. We wholeheartedly support the wise Le- 
ninist policy pursued by our Communist Party and the So- 
viet Government designed to establish peace in the Middle 
East and render the Arab countries all-round assistance in 
repulsing the military aggression of the Israeli invaders. 

Within the close-knit family of the Soviet nations we 
shall make an even greater effort for the further strengthen- 
ing and flourishing of our wonderful motherland—bulwark 
of peace and freedom of nations throughout the world. 


I. F. BLECH, garage superintendent, the “Moskvo- 
retsky” state farm, Odintsovo district; L. Y. BEILIN- 
SON, chairman of the “Put k Kommunizmu’’ collec- 
tive farm, Pushkino district; F. H. KILIMNIK, chief 
agronomist, the Ramenskoye state farm, Candidate 
of Agricultural Science; V. I. BERKOVICH, chief 
engineer, the “Gorki-2” farm, Odintsovo district; 
Z. A. RATUSHNY, horticulturist, the ‘“‘Pamyat 
Ilyicha” state farm, Pushkino district; R. F. SE- 
MYONOVA, team leader, ‘the “Pamyat Ilyicha” 
state farm, Pushkino district; L. B. LEVIN, fitter, 
the Bratsevo poultry farm, Solnechnogorsk district; 
I. T. SHIGER, team leader, the ‘“Kuznetsovsky” 
state farm, Naro-Fominsk district; B. A. TROYAN- 
SKY, fitter, the Lyubertsy trade equipment plant; 
G. M. GERZHGORINA, hot-house expert, the Mos- 
sovet state farm, Lyubertsy district; A. L. KHEN- 
KIN, assistant foreman, the Monino factory of worst- 
ed fabrics, Shchyolkovo district; I. M. SHNAIBER- 
MAN, lathe-operator, the Chepelevsky state farm, 
Chekhov district; N. N. VAKSMAN, worker, the 
Kuntsevo poultry farm, Odintsovo _ district; 
G. I. SHAKHTMAN, machine-operator, the “Akri- 
khin” factory, Noginsk district; I. M. ZAKSENBERG, 


23 


chief live-stock expert, the Vladimir Ilyich collective 
farm, Moscow region; S. M. PAUKOV, Chairman of 
the Dzerzhinsky collective farm, Lyubertsy district; 
N. L. KHAZANOV, leader of a horticulturist team, 
the state farm named after the 2Ilst Congress of the 
CPSU, Lenin district 


Pravda, March 18, 1970 


AN END MUST BE PUT TO ISRAELI 
AGGRESSION 


We, professors and heads of departments at the Cen- 
tral Institute for Advanced Medical Studies, Communists 
and non-Party people, are indignant over the unending ag- 
gression against the Arab peoples carried out by the Israeli 
ruling circles with the support of US imperialists. 


The aggression is inspired by Zionism which represents 
the most reactionary, chauvinistic views of the Jewish capi- 
talist circles. 


Together with all the citizens of our beloved socialist 
country we scientists of Jewish nationality fully approve 
the policy of our Communist Party and Government, aimed 
at a peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict and 
the curbing of the aggressor. 


The medical profession is among the most humane pro- 
fessions in the world. That is why we resolutely protest aga- 
inst the barbaric raids of peaceful Arab cities and villages 
by Israeli aircraft, against the killing of the civilian popu- 
lation. 


Israel must stop its policy of conquest and withdraw 
from occupied territory unconditionally. 


We representatives of the older generation of Soviet 
doctors of Jewish nationality, who, together with all the 
peoples of our united multinational country, took an active 
part in the Great Patriotic War against fascism, are indig- 
nant at the provocative calls of the Israeli Government for 
us to leave our socialist country where we are full-fledged 
citizens, and active builders of communism. We would like 


24 


to tell the Israeli Government that our real native land is 
the Soviet Union. 


Professor E. M. BELOSTOTSKAYA, head of the 
Department of Children’s and Juvenile Hygiene, 
Doctor of Medicine; Professor A. E. RABUKHIN, 
head of the TB Department, Honoured Scientific 
Worker, Doctor of Medicine; Professor S. M. LEI- 
TES, head of the Department of Pathophysiology, 
Honoured Scientific Worker, Doctor of Medicine; 
Professor P. E. ZABLUDOVSKY, head of the De- 
partment of the History of Medicine, Doctor of Me- 
dicine; Assistant Professor A. M. TIMKO, head of 
the Department of Medical Service, Candidate of 
Medicine; Professor G. M. RASHEVSKAYA, head 
of the Department Prophylactic Pathology, Doctor of 
Medicine: Professor M. E. SUKHAREVA, head of 
the Department of Children’s Infectious Diseases, 
Doctor of Medicine; Professor D. V. KAN, head of 
the Department of Urogynaecology, Doctor of Me- 
dicine; Professor M. B. TSUKER, head of the De- 
partment of Children’s Neuropathology, Doctor of 
Medicine 


Moskovskaya Pravda, March 18, 1970 


ZIONISTS REBUFFED 


Tbilisi. A press conference was held here following 
the provocative Zionist outcry about the “position of Jews” 
in the USSR. It was called by the republican Journalists’ 
Union on the request of Jews living in Georgia. 

Among the speakers at the conference were Abram Pa- 
pismedov, team leader of the collective farm in Tsiteligori 
village, Lagodekhi district; Roman Gorelashvili, Merited 
Artiste of the Georgian SSR, Professor of the Tbilisi Con- 
servatory; Rafael Yeligulashvili, Deputy to the Georgian 
SSR Supreme Soviet and President of the Chamber of Com- 
merce of Georgia; Mikhail Chachashvili, Merited Physician 
of the Georgian SSR, chief surgeon at the Central Hospi- 
tal in Oni district, veteran of the Great Patriotic War; Si- 
mon Shatashvili, D.Sc. (Phys. Math.); Gigla Khukhashvili, 
writer; and others. They demanded an end to the imperial- 
ist conspiracy in the Middle East and exposed the reactio- 
nary role of international Zionism. 


25 


The following statement was made public at the press 
conference: 

As the military of Israel, abetted by Western militarist 
circles, above all by US imperialists, continues its aggres- 
sive war against the Arab states, as the situation that has 
developed in the Middle East threatens world peace, we 
citizens of Jewish nationality of the Georgian SSR, who 
have gathered here from all parts of the Republic, resolu- 
tely condemn the Zionist provocateurs. 

The war unleashed by Israel is an imperialist and ag- 
gressive war. It has nothing in common with the vital in- 
terests of the mass of the Jewish people. We, therefore, to- 
gether with all progressive mankind, denounce the policy 
pursued by Israel’s ruling clique. The leaders of interna- 
tional Zionism and the rulers of the Israeli state call on us 
to go to the “sacred” “‘promised” land. They claim to speak 
for the Soviet Jews. But what kind of “return” can these 
“intercessors” talk about? Our motherland is the land 
where our forebears lived from time immemorial, where we 
freely live today and work for the good of our great country. 

The Georgian Jews enjoy all rights and benefits in our 
Republic. The Soviet state has opened before them a wide 
road towards creative and fruitful work. Thus, for example, 
68 of the Deputies to the Supreme Soviet and local Soviets 
of the Georgian SSR are Georgian Jews. We have among 
us nine Doctors and 80 Candidates of Science. 

We regard as demagogic and provocative the statement 
made by the leaders of Zionism and the Government of Is- 
rael about the supposed persecutions of Jews in our country 
and about their alleged wish to go to Israel. 

We categorically declare: no, gentlemen in Tel Aviv, all 
your attempts to tear us away from our country and turn us 
into cannon fodder and a blind instrument of your adven- 
turist policy are in vain! 

We are deeply convinced that today all aggressive de- 
signs and schemes are doomed to failure, that the sacred 
cause of the struggle of the peoples for peace will triumph. 


Y. Y. ADZHAMELASHVILI, worker at the Tbilisi 
silk-weaving mill, Deputy to the Tbilisi Ordzhoni- 
kidze District Soviet; S. M. BATIASHVILI, chief 
designer at the Kutaisi motor works; Assistant Pro- 
fessor M. S. BINIASHVILI, Georgian Polytechnical 
Institute; Professor R. I. GORELASHVILI, Merited 
Artiste of the Georgian SSR, Tbilisi Conservatory; 


26 


M. D. DAVITASHVILI, journalist, Deputy to the 
Georgian SSR Supreme Soviet, editor of the republi- 
can newspaper Soplis Tskhovreba; I. I. ELIASHVI- 
LI, director of “Tbilobuvtorg”; R. S. ELIGULASH- 
VILI, President of the Georgian Chamber of Com- 
merce, Deputy to the Georgian SSR Supreme Soviet; 
K. I. MAMISTVALOV, worker at the Tskhinval 
wood-working combine; D. R. MELUKHA, journal- 
ist; I. D. MIKHELASHVILI, chairman of the Exe- 
cutive Committee of the Kulashi Settlement Soviet, 
‘Samtred district; M. P. RIZHINASHVILI, chief en- 
gineer at the Kutaisi Construction Administration of 
the Ministry of Light Industry of the Georgian SSR; 
A. K. PAPISMEDOV, team leader of the collective 
farm in Tsiteligori village, Lagodekhi district; 
A. I. TSITSIASHVILI, Candidate of History, 
F. D. PICHKHVADZE, chief of the organization 
department, Gruztorg, veteran of the Great Patrio- 
tic War, Retired Major; M. I. CHACHASHVILI, 
chief surgeon, Central Hospital of Oni district, Me- 
rited Physician of the Georgian SSR; M. I. DZHA- 
NASHVILI, artist; G. M. KHUKHASHVILI, wri- 
ter; Professor S. K. SHATASHVILI, Doctor of 
Mathematical and Physical Sciences; T. R. TSIT- 
SUASHVILI, division head of the State Bank 


Krasnaya Zvezda, March 19, 1970 


SHAME ON THE ZIONIST PROVOCATEURS 


We, Moscow workers of Jewish nationality, vigorously 
condemn the aggression of the Israeli military against the 
Arab nations and wrathfully protest against the heinous 
crimes committed by the Tel Aviv rulers with the help of 
their Washington backers. 

We are appalled at the statements by certain Israeli ru- 
lers, particularly Golda Meir, claiming that Soviet Jews 
should settle in Israel which is allegedly their real home- 
land. It is absolutely clear that such claims can and should 
be assessed as lies and calumny being spread by the Zion- 
ist gentlemen for their own ends. We fully realize that the 
criminal war being waged by Israel is a manifestation of 
imperialist policies. Seeking in every way to step up the 
number of emigrants to Israel, its rulers thereby hope to 
secure cannon fodder for their predatory army. We know 
from the Soviet press that certain “experts on the Jewish 
question” sought to interpret the press conference held in 


27 


the Soviet Union on the situation in the Middle East from 
their Zionist positions. But the aims and wishes of these 
people are clear enough. They seek to aggravate the con- 
flict in that part of the globe and support the policy of in- 
ternational Zionism. 

The victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution 
made us free and equal citizens of the Soviet socialist home- 
land. The Jewish pale, pogroms and other anti-semitic 
manifestations were done away with. Our homeland is the 
Soviet Union. Side by side with the great Russian people, 
with all nations of our country, citizens of Jewish nationa- 
lity fought during the years of the Great Patriotic War. 
Many of our fathers and elder brothers gave their lives for 
our Moscow, for our homeland. We cherish the traditions 
of our elder generation. Now, jointly with factory and of- 
fice workers of different nationalities who live and work 
in Moscow, we Jewish workers share in solving tasks pos- 
ed by the 23rd Congress of the CPSU. We strive to accom- 
plish the five-year plan ahead of time and to make a worthy 
contribution in honour of the Lenin centenary. 

So Mrs. Golda Meir had better not waste her energy 
on mendacious appeals and assertions. We workers, like 
all other Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality—engineers, 
technicians, scientists, artists and writers—have nothing in 
common either with Mrs. Meir or with the leaders of Zion- 
ist organizations and cannot have anything in common with 
them. Their interests are profoundly alien to us. But we 
understand and hold dear the interests of the working peo- 
ple in Arab countries, suffering from Israeli aggression, just 
as the interests of the working Jews in Israel. 

We are outraged at the barbaric actions of the Israeli 
military which, seeking to please the USA imperialists and 
to safeguard their profits, are raining bombs and shells on 
peaceful Arab people. But the Zionist clique should realize 
their crimes will not remain unpunished. The Israeli extre- 
mists are resolutely condemned by peoples of different coun- 
tries, by all upright Jews wherever they live. 

We censure the Zionist provocateurs and demand a 
stop to the military adventure, to the barbaric actions against 
the Arab nations. The Security Council resolution of No- 
vember 22, 1967, must be observed. 

We entirely support the peace-loving policy of our Le- 
ninist Communist Party and Soviet Government. We shall 


28 


devote all our forces, knowledge and energy to the further 
strengthening of the might of our great socialist homeland 
which is consistently upholding the cause of peace on earth 
and international security. 


M. BALINER, electrician, the “Moskvichka” garment 
factory; S. BARZMAN, pivot-fitter, the Likhachyov 
motor works; G. BOKLER, mechanic, the “Znamya 
Truda” plant; P. BRANTMAN, lathe-operator, the 
Kuibyshev electric engineering plant; R. GERTSOV- 
SKAYA, embroideress, the “Moskvichka’” garment 
factory; Z. GONCHARUK, chief storekeeper, the 
Kuibyshev electric engineering plant; Y. ZHITOMIR- 
SKY, fitter, the “Znamya Truda” plant; M. KREN- 
GAUZ, senior foreman, “Vladimir Ilyich” plant; 
P. LEIZEROVICH, senior electrician, “Vladimir 
Ilyich” plant; A. LIOKUMOVICH, loader, the “Zna- 
mya Truda” plant; Y. NEPOMNYASHCHY, fitter, 
the Kuibyshev electric engineering plant; Y. NUL- 
MAN, fitter, the ‘“Kalibr” plant; A. PISAREVSKY, 
loader, the “Znamya Truda” plant; S. SEREBRYA- 
NY, trimming fitter, the Kuibyshev electric engineer- 
ing plant; G. SLOBODNIK, grinder; B. SLUCHEV- 
SKY, lathe-operator, a tool plant; H. FLEISHMAN, 
fitter, the Likhachyov motor works; V. FREIDLIN, 
fitter, the “Kalibr’” plant; R. ENDEL, pleating wor- 
ker, the “Moskvichka” garment factory 


Pravda, March 20, 1970 


JUDGEMENT OF THE PEOPLES 


We, veteran members of the Communist Party, people 
of different nationalities liying in our Soviet motherland, 
give our wholehearted support to the letter of protest, writ- 
ten by the veterans of the Great October Socialist Revolu- 
tion and published in Pravda on March 13, 1970, against 
the insolent provocations of the Israeli rulers. 

We took part in the struggle against internal and ex- 
ternal counter-revolution during the Civil War and fought 
the German fascists in the Great Patriotic War. We helped 
in the foundation and the consolidation of the Soviet social- 
ist state in which the exploitation of man by man and the 
oppression of individual nationalities have been abolished. 

The Israeli ruling circles slander our motherland by 
claiming that Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality are sub- 


29 


ject to discrimination. It is common knowledge that all 
Soviet citizens enjoy equal rights irrespective of their na- 
tionality, that they are united by ties of fraternity. Tel 
Aviv’s propaganda organs have launched this smear cam- 
paign in order to divert the attention of the world public 
from the atrocities the Israeli military are committing in the 
occupied territories of Arab countries. 

With the active support of US military circles and in- 
ternational Zionism, the Israeli extremists—malicious ene- 
mies of the working people of all countries—are stepping 
up aggression; they refuse to comply with the UN Security 
Council resolution of November 22, 1967, and withdraw 
their troops from the occupied territories and stop their at- 
trocities against the Arab peoples. 

An end must be put to the aggressive actions of the Is- 
raeli military. 

Like all Soviet people we fully support the foreign and 
home policy of our Communist Party and Soviet Govern- 
ment which are resolutely and consistently defending world 
peace and security. 

E. Y. TETINA (CPSU member since 1910); 
L. Y. TETINA (CPSU member since 1913); 


G. O. LYASKIN (CPSU member since (ote. 
A. PAVLOV (CPSU member since 1918 


KOLCHINSKY (CPSU member since 1919); 
. L. FALYANO (CPSU member since 1919); 


A 

E. G. 

M 
N. E. BOIKO (CPSU member since 1919); 

A 

F. 


. D. MARANS (CPSU member since 1919); 
M. SOLODOV (CPSU member since 1919); 
S. N. BEININ (CPSU member since 1919); 
V. I. SHUNEVICH (CPSU member since 1919); 
I. I. GELLER (CPSU member since 1920); 
D. M. LEVINA (CPSU member since 1920) 


Moskovskaya Pravda, March 20, 1970 


SHAME ON TEL AVIV’S PROVOCATEURS 


We builders of the Jewish Autonomous Region resolute- 
ly condemn Israeli aggression against the Arab peoples. We 
wrathfully protest against the declarations made by Israeli 
Prime Minister Golda Meir and other Israeli rulers that 
Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality should go and live in 
Israel, their alleged native land. We regard such declara- 


30 


tions as lies and slander. Translated from the Pharisaical 
language of the Zionist this means: “Betray your socialist 
country; betray the fraternal peoples of your country, with 
whom hand in hand you had accomplished the October 
Revolution, fought against fascism, built towns and cities, 
and plants and factories and tilled the land. Betray them 
and in return you will enter the capitalist ‘paradise,’ you 
will be given the right to kill Arabs and to die for the in- 
terests of Tel Aviv’s ruling clique and the US imperialists 
backing it.” 

Is this not a “tempting” prospect? Mrs. Golda Meir, who 
demands the “return” of Soviet citizens of Jewish nationa- 
lity from the Soviet Union to Israel, should not waste her 
energy on slanderous appeals and allegations. Like all the 
other Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality we do not and 
cannot have anything in common neither with Tel Aviv’s 
extremists nor with the leaders of Zionist organizations. We 
say: ‘Mir veln undzer shtetl alein bashtein,’’ which means: 
“We shall stand up for ourselves without your help.’ War 
is raging on the banks of the Jordan; large-scale construc- 
tion is under way in the Amur region. There one destroys; 
here one builds. A clear blue sky stretches over Birobidzhan. 
Its people enjoy the fresh spring air, their peaceful life 
and work. 

We are builders. We build dwelling houses, cultural es- 
tablishments and industrial enterprises. For the achieve- 
ments in economic and cultural construction the Jewish Au- 
tonomous Region has been awarded the Order of Lenin, the 
highest award in the Soviet Union. We builders have also 
contributed substantially to this. We have built plants and 
factories which produce harvester combines, power trans- 
formers, furniture, shoes, paper and knitted wear. 

All of us belong to work collectives: at large and small 
construction sites in both town and country. We design 
farm machinery, mine gold, treat patients and solve econo- 
mic tasks in the local republican and state organs. Russians, 
Jews, Ukrainians and Nanaians all work together. And it 
never occurs to anybody to wonder about his neighbour’s 
nationality. Our fellow townsman Vladimir Izrailevich Pel- 
ler, chairman of the “Zavety Ilyicha” (Lenin’s Behests) col- 
lective farm, Hero of Socialist Labour, winner of the Order 
of Glory, Deputy of the Khabarovsk Territorial Soviet of 
Working People’s Deputies, was right when he said at a 


31 


regional meeting of Jewish Working People: “I do not look 
into my passport every day to see what my nationality is, 
nor do I do this every month or cven every year. I have 
forgotten to think about this.” 

In our country the national question has been solved 
once and for all in the name of friendship among the Soviet 
peoples. Golda Meir and her friends are once again pulling 
the stail “ideas” of rabid nationalism out of the rubbish 
heap of history. Speaking at the above-mentioned regional 
meeting of Jewish working people, Saveli Borisovich Grin- 
berg, a team leader of fitters of the “Birobidzhanstroi” build- 
ing trust, a veteran of the Great Patriotic War and a winner 
of the Order of Lenin and the Order of the Red Star, ex- 
pressed all our feelings when he said: “Instead of butting 
into other people’s affairs the Israeli rulers had better think 
about the affairs of their own country, withdraw their 
troops from the occupied Arab territories and live in peace 
with their neighbours. This would be the most sensible po- 
licy for the Israeli state and its future.” 

That is our stand, gentlemen Zionists. We should also 
like to add: We cannot travel one and the same road; in 
vain are your attempts to split our Soviet family. 


In the centre of Birobidzhan, the capital of the Jewish 
Autonomous Region, two streets run parallel to each other. 
They are named after Lenin and Sholom Aleichem. We 
have built them and given them these names. Is not this 
symbolic? 

So who are those whom Mrs. Golda Meir is out to save, 
and from what? A skilled worker from his favourite job? 
A builder from his architectural work? All of us from our 
peaceful labour which has earned us honour and .respect? 

You are quite mistaken, Mrs. Golda Meir! 

True to our Soviet country whose full-fledged citizens 
we are, together with the entire Soviet people, we are clos- 
ing our ranks. We give our wholehearted support to the 
peaceful policy of our Leninist Communist Party and our 
Soviet Government and will continue to fight in the front 
ranks for freedom, democracy, peace and world security. 


YAKOV GOLDMAN, chief of architectural design 
shop No. 6 of “Khabarovskgrazhdanproekt” Institu- 
te; MIKHAIL ZELIGER, bricklayer of “Birobid- 
zhantsclinstroi” trust, communist shock worker; 


FIRA KOFMAN, chairman of building committee, 
32 


building department No. 254; EFIM KRICHEV- 
SKY, team leader of decorators of building depart- 
ment No. 254; KIM KUNIN, chief of building-and- 
fitting department No. 1 of “Birobidzhantselinstroi” 
trust; ALEXANDER KATS, chief engineer for sa- 
fety engineering of building-and-fitting department 
No. 1; ALEXANDER KRIGER, chief architect of 
Birobidzhan; YAKOV LYUBOMIRSKY, leader of 
a team of decorators of building-and-fitting depart- 
ment No. 1; DAVID FUKSMAN, chief of building 
department No. 254 of the “Birobidzhanstroi” trust; 
EFIM YURKOVSKY, team leader of a team of 
building department No. 254; IHIL YUZEFOVSKY, 
joiner of building-and-fitting department No. 1. 


Birobidzhan Stroitelnaya Gazeta, March 25, 1970 


WE ARE EQUALS AMONG EQUALS 


The provocative call by Golda Meir for Soviet people 
of Jewish nationality “to return to the land of their for- 
bears” has been justly rebuffed at numerous meetings of 
working people and in the Soviet press. We students are also 
eager to speak our mind to the ruling Zionist clique of 
Israel. 

Though we do not have such experience or knowledge 
as the veterans of the Great Patriotic War, of labour and 
scientific study, such as General A. A. Dragunsky, Acade- 
mician M. B. Mitin or collective-farm chairman and Hero 
of Socialist Labour, I. A. Yegudin, we are well aware of 
our place in the ranks of builders of communism and of our 
responsibility for what takes place in the world. This 
awareness gives us the right to raise our voice against Tel 
Aviv’s provocations. 

We are preparing ourselves for a humane profession, 
that of a teacher, an educator of the younger generation. 
We are guided in life by the lofty ideas of peace, creative 
labour and friendship among peoples. After graduation 
most of us will work in the village. 

The foul deeds and bloody atrocities perpetrated by 
the Israeli aggressors on the occupied land of the Arab peo- 
ples are utterly incompatible with our ideals, views and as- 
pirations. We cannot even imagine living in a country that 
commits aggression against the neighbouring peoples and 


2—474 33 


makes a living from the sops it receives from the imperialist 
sharks, the leaders of international Zionism. For us Israel 
has never been and will never be the “native land of all 
Jews.” We are true to our Soviet people, our native So- 
viet country and the Communist Party which has reared and 
educated us, and we shall never fail to carry out our pat- 
riotic duty to our real native country contrary to all Zionist 
expectations. 

We abhor all forms of racism and nationalism, all pro- 
pagation of one’s exclusiveness or superiority. All crimes 
against freedom and humanity, whether they are perpe- 
trated in Vietnam by murderers paid in dollars or by Israeli 
henchmen in the Middle East, fill us equally with indigna- 
tion. And when Dayan and other Tel Aviv’s tycoons call 
upon Jewish people living outside Israel to give aid to the 
Jews in Israel, or to be more precise, to Israel’s ruling cli- 
que, we think of our sacred duty to give aid to the victims 
of Israeli aggression: Arabs and the Jewish working people 
who are languishing under the yoke of imperialism and 
their ‘‘brethren,” the Zionist capitalists. We express our so- 
lidarity with those who are fighting for freedom and peace. 

We who have been brought up by the Leninist Kom- 
somol cannot tread the same road with the Meirs and Day- 
ans who have friends and allies among the butchers of 
Majdanek, Auschwitz and other fascist factories of death 
where people were murdered by the revanchists, neo-nazis 
and their like. 

The Soviet Constitution guarantees each citizen of our 
country the right to education. 

At our Institute there are many Jews among the students 
and the teaching staff. The latter includes: B. I. Kotlyar, 
head of the department of physics; K. P. Lyubarksy, head 
of the department of foreign languages; M. S. Brodsky, head 
of the department of mathematics; Z. V. Ornis, head of the 
department of physical culture; R. A. Verkholaz, head of 
the department of music. All of them enjoy the affection 
and respect of the multinational student collective. No one 
has ever opposed students of other nationalities to us Jews, 
and we would like to tell Meir and all her followers: do not 
protect us from the mythological oppression which you have 
invented. We are protected by the Soviet system, the Soviet 
Constitution and the greatest power of our country—the 
inviolable friendship among our peoples. 


34 


_ Our heart is with the Arab peoples and with those work- 
ing people of Israel who are fighting under the leadership 
of their Communist Party for a peaceful settlement of the 
Middle East problem; it is with the people of Vietnam and 
with all who are for freedom, justice, racial and national 

equality, peace and a better life on earth. 
Students at the Ushinski Odessa Pedagogical Insti- 
tute: VLADIMIR CHERVONNY, ILYA MEDZON, 
EFIM BESTERMAN, MILITA LEMBERSKAYA, 
VERA GISHAITER, ADELA LERNER, BELA 

LERNER; 

Graduate students: ZHANNA GORBULSKAYA, 
YAKOV SHVARTSMAN. 


Odessa Selskaya Zhizn, March 26, 1970 


Indignant Reply to Zionists 


The following are letters from Soviet ci- 
tizens published in Pravda, Izvestia, Trud, 
Selskaya Zhizn, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 
and other newspapers. 


The Jan. 13 issue of Pravda carries letters by Soviet 
Jews protesting against the provocations of the Israeli rul- 
ing circles. I fully agree with the authors of these letters. 

I am a Jew by nationality and my homeland is the Uniort 
of Soviet Socialist Republics. I am incensed at the impudent 
statement of the Israeli Prime Minister who tries to get 
Soviet Jews to “return” to Israel. 

The Leninist Party has educated me in a spirit of pro- 
letarian internationalism. [ am ashamed and pained that 
the Israeli state is following in the footsteps of fascist Ger- 
many. 

Is not the whole world well aware that it was my coun- 
try, the Soviet Union, that saved mankind from the fascist 
vandals? Sparing neither effort nor life our people de- 
fended their homeland during the Great Patriotic War. 

We are building a radiant life—communism. 

Let the Israeli aggressors and their imperialist patrons 
know that all the Soviet people, irrespective of nationality, 
are wholeheartedly united around our Leninist Party and 
the Soviet Government. 


S. DRIZOVSKY, 
Hero of the Soviet Union 


2* 35 


I am one of those who formerly lived in Palestine 
(present-day Israel) and waged a fierce struggle against 
Zionists of all shades and against the British imperialists. 


I can say from my personal experience that even at that 
time when the Jews and the Arabs had no rights under Bri- 
tish rule, the Zionists were hostile towards the Arab popu- 
lation. 


All the Zionist parties, beginning with the Achdut Ha- 
avoda and ending with the ultra-Right Herut, followed, and 
continue to follow, two reactionary slogans: 


{. “Kibush Haaretz,” which means, seizure of land, 
from the Arabs, of course (furthermore, within the “bibli- 
cal” borders, from the Nile to the Euphrates). 


2. “Kibush Haavoda”—taking away of work, from the 
Arabs, of course. 


These same Zionists, reactionaries and aggressors, are 
now in power in the Israeli state. Carrying out the behests 
of the imperialists in the struggle against the national-libe- 
ration movement of the Arab countries, they launched the 
aggression in 1967 against the neighbouring Arab countries 
and captured large territories from them. 


The aging Golda Meir has her reasons for slandering 
the Soviet Union, for cooking up lies about us. 


Israel needs more and more cannon fodder. Jews from 
the capitalist countries, the United States, Britain and 
France, are somehow not in a hurry to lay down their lives 
in an aggressive war against the Arabs. And the cunning 
Israeli Prime Minister would like to enlist Soviet Jews for 
this purpose. 

No, Madame, nothing will come of your lies and slan- 
der. If you want Israel to exist, busy yourself with other 
things. Return to the Arabs all the lands seized from them, 
bring back all the refugees you have expelled, and live in 
peace with your Arab neighbours. 


M. PANICH, 

engineer of the Kommunarsk iron 

and steel plant, former inhabi- 

Kommunarsk tant of Haifa 


36 


I opened my Pravda and couldn’t believe my eyes: the 
Israeli rulers are so “concerned” about all Soviet Jews and 
are trying to get them to “return”... to Israel. 

I read it and was thunderstruck! How did we ever ma- 
nage to get along until now without these guardians and 
such a “motherland” as Israel?! 

You, Golda Meir, are head of the present Israeli Go- 
vernment but you don’t seem able to understand a simple 
thing. You don’t know the psychology of the Soviet citizen, 
of that self-same Jew. You know nothing about his love for 
his real motherland, the Soviet Union, the motherland that 
brought him up, nurtured him and taught him to be kind 
and have tremendous love for peace and people of good 
will, to cherish the motherland that in the black years of 
the fascist invasion he defended as that which is most sacred 
to man, which one must guard with one’s life if need be. 


Minsk E. PORITSKAYA 


I, a worker of the Kharkov Order of Lenin Electrical 
Engineering Plant, indignant at the perfidious policy of the 
Israeli leaders, have decided to take up my pen. The ruling 
clique of that country is continuing to blackmail the peo- 
ples of the neighbouring states by fooling their own people, 
while enjoying the support of international imperialism. 

Peddling the idea of defending Jews from Arabs, the 
Israeli rulers are covering up their true aims. These aims 
are the struggle of the forces of imperialism against the 
progressive movement in the Arab East. In other words 
everyone can clearly see that what is going on is a class 
struggle, not a struggle of one nation against another. 1 wo- 
uld like to remind the Government of Israel that in smash- 
ing German fascism, the Soviet Union saved many peoples 
including the Jews. 


Kharkov Z. KIPERMAN 
37 


I am incensed at the unprecedented insolence of the Is- 
raeli Zionists. 

Who gave them the right to concern themselves about 
a nationality who, shoulder to shoulder with the great Rus- 
sian people and other fraternal peoples, fought on the bar- 
ricades in the stormy year of 1917, smashed the nationalis- 
tic gangs, restored the economy, and defended the gains of 
the October Revolution during the Great Patriotic War? 

I was born and grew up in Russia and for 46 years have 
been a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union. With our fellow-thinkers we built the world’s first 
socialist state which stands for equality and freedom for 
all nations. 

What are the Zionists counting on? Tribal survivals? 
Hardly! The aim of the “call” is to sow strife between the 
peoples of the USSR. Nothing will come of that, gentlemen. 
Just as nothing came out of attempts by other miserable po- 
liticians of imperialism! 


Znamenka, Kirovograd A. GOLODNITSKY 
region, the Ukraine 


I read in Pravda of January 13, 1970 what Soviet Jews 
have to say about the provocative appeal of Israeli Prime 
Minister, Golda Meir. 

The Prime Minister said she is trying to get Soviet Jews 
to “return” to Israel. This was said, moreover, as though 
this would be quite agreeable to Soviet Jews. But the Soviet 
Jews are making it clear they do not agree! As an Estonian 
I can quite understand these feelings. Soviet Jews are satis- 
fied with Soviet administration and their Government. They 
do not need the despicable rule and “benefactions” of the 
Meirs and Dayans. They find inacceptable the interests of 
the Israeli Zionists; they find inacceptable bourgeois na- 
tionalism and the capitalist system with its unemployment 
and exploitation. They have no intentions of having a hand 
in the plunder of the Arab peoples. Israel is an aggressive 
state like all imperialist states. It annexed the land of the 


38 


neighbouring Arab states. Violating international law, I[s- 
rael is now refusing to carry out the UN decisions and re- 
turn the Arab territories seized. 


Oiljandi, Estonia V. LAANTE 


A person who has been through a war will never forget 
the horrors and sufferings that war causes. It is with excru- 
ciating pain that we hear about the crimes of the Israeli 
aggressors who shoot at women and children, raze towns 
and burn down villages: we in Byelorussia lived through 
these horrors during the nazi invasion. 

Zionism is to blame for these monstrous crimes. The 
rabid clique ruling the roost in the state of Israel, has turn- 
ed the country into an instrument of imperialism, an instru- 
ment of aggression against the freedom-loving Arab peo- 
ples. 

The most disgusting thing is that the Tel Aviv rulers 
are trying to convince us, Soviet citizens of Jewish extrac- 
tion, that our motherland is over there. This claim is no- 
thing but a despicable lie. For shame, gentlemen! Phari- 
saism has always been odious. As an old Communist, a per- 
son who lost his mother and close relatives during the last 
war, I greatly resent it. The Soviet Union is our only mo- 
therland, and we resolutely reject the hypocritical “con- 


cern” of the Israeli Zionists. 
ZAIR AZGUR, 
People’s Artiste of the Byelorussian 
SSR, member of the USSR Academy 
Minsk of Arts, State Prizes Winner 


As a Soviet Jew I condemn, together with millions of 
Soviet people, the crimes of the Israeli Zionists who have 
adopted nazi methods. The Israeli rulers are erecting a 
monument to their iniquity on the blood of Arabs and toil- 
ing Jews. During the Great Patriotic War my brothers and 
myself fought against nazism. My brothers were killed in 
action. 


39 


One of the portraits of Heroes of the Soviet Union hang- 
ing in our town’s main square is that of Zalman Vikhreyev, 
a hero who gave his life for the Soviet Leninist nationali- 
ties policy. Now in peacetime one finds Jews in all spheres 
of endeavour in the country working on a par with other 
nationalities. We fully support the Arab people in their 
just struggle and protest against imperialism and Zionism. 


Zhlobin Y. E. GINZBURG 


Where are the Israeli Zionists inviting us, Soviet Jews? 
To their “capitalist paradise”? But we shed our blood to- 
gether with other fraternal peoples in October 1917 to get 
rid of that kind of “paradise.” Can anybody expect us to 
believe nationalistic Zionist propaganda spiced with reli- 
gion? You are gravely mistaken, gentlemen. Soviet Jews 
are Soviet patriots who want nothing to do with the capi- 
talist state of Israel, an imperialist puppet. We contemptu- 
ously sweep aside the aspersions and base slander about our 
socialist motherland spread by international Zionism. Zion- 
ist ideas are alien to citizens of the great Soviet land. Le- 
nin’s Party has reared us in a spirit of proletarian interna- 
tionalism. We feel nothing but wrath and indignation at 
the actions of the Israeli rulers who have pushed their coun- 
try to follow in the footsteps of the nazi barbarians. It is a 
crying shame besmirching the memory of millions of Jews 
who perished at the hands of the nazi aggressors. 


G. I. TSUKERMAN 

I. N. APTEKAREV 

M. M. BREGER 

Kherson M. Y. SMOLYANSKY 


I condemn the provocative actions of the Zionists who 
seek to befool the Israeli population with nationalist pro- 
paganda, to turn the Israeli people into cannon fodder to 
be used against the national-liberation movement in the 
Middle East. Now these present rulers of Israel, whose hands 


40 


are dripping with the blood of Arab civilians, clamour for 
the “return” of all Jews to... Israel. What return are they 
talking about? Neither my grandfather, father, other relat- 
ives nor friends have ever been there. We Soviet Jews con- 
sider such statements the vilest insult. 

It was not Israel I had in mind when I defended our 
motherland against the nazi invaders during the Great Pat- 
riotic War. We consider this provocationist appeal coming 
from imperialist-supporting Zionists the usual anti-Soviet 


attempts. 
Orenburg B. I. ROVENSKY 


* & 


I am an ordinary Soviet woman. Recently I read in the 
newspaper about the statement made by Golda Meir, Israel’s 
Prime Minister, stating her Government’s willingness to 
“shelter” all Soviet Jews in Israel. I am sixty-four years old, 
of Jewish descent. I wanted to tell the Zionists we contem- 
ptuously reject their “solicitude.” Here in the Soviet Union 
peoples of all nationalities, including Jews, live and breathe 
as free men. 

The Zionists need more and more soldiers for the war 
in the Middle East. That is why they are exhorting Jews to 
go to Israel. Nothing will come of it. Our young people will 
take up arms, if need be, to defend our beloved mother- 
land—the Soviet Union—but not the imperialist state of 


Israel. 
Kursk S. P. NARVID 


Another act of barbarism on the part of the Israeli mi- 
litary—the bombing of a civilian factory in the Cairo su- 
burbs—has been wrathfully condemned by the Soviet pub- 
lic. The aggressor dropped napalm bombs which killed 
dozens of Egyptian workers. Recidivist criminals are recog- 
nized by their “hand.” The word “napalm” reminds us of 
the fields of Korea and the jungles of long-suffering Vietnam. 
Everywhere one can see the hand of the overseas imperialist 
predator trying to clutch onto collapsing colonial rule and 
regain domination over the liberated nations. 


23—474 41 


But history treats them with cruel irony. The shock force 
of imperialism in the Middle East is the ruling clique ex- 
pounding an extremely nationalistic bourgeois concept of 
Zionism—that of rallying all Jews round Mount Zion of 
the Bible. 

The reactionary and Utopian nature of this theory has 
long been exposed by the entire development of history. 
It is not isolation or opposition of one, chosen, nation to 
others but cohesion of the working masses of all nationali- 
ties and struggle for the freedom of oppressed peoples in 
the face of the common enemy, imperialism, and against 
their “own” bourgeoisie and landed aristocracy that led to 
the complete elimination of national oppression in the So- 
viet Union and all other socialist countries. 

But the imperialists, driven to despair by the fact that 
their colonial empires are toppling to pieces and their as- 
tronomical profits are vanishing into thin air, will stoop 
to anything. Bloodshed has been going on for about three 
years now in the Middle East with numerous innocent vic- 
tims—children, women and old people—and thousands of 
people left homeless. The Suez Canal is closed to naviga- 
tion. 

But the Arab peoples continue their resolute struggle for 
freedom, independence and national progress, for restoray 
tion of the occupied territories. We proclaim solidarity with 
this struggle and demand the immediate cessation of ag- 
gression and implementation of the Security Council resolu- 
tion on peaceful settlement of the conflict. 

Suffering moral setbacks, the Israeli aggressors are re- 
sorting to political and ideological subversion. They seek 
contact with reactionary forces, in particular those in the 
FRG, and have the nerve to assert that all Jews support 
their actions. The absurdity and mendacity of their insi- 
nuations is obvious. The sacrilege committed by Zionist 
leaders in fraternizing with the nazi successors is an insult 
to the memory of millions of nazi victims. 

Today we repeat the passionate appeal of the Moscow 
Conference of Communist and Workers’ Parties: “We Com- 
munists again appeal to all honest people on the globe to 
join efforts in the struggle against the man-hater ideology 
and practices of racism. We call for a very wide movement 
of protest against the most abominable facts of reality—the 
brutal reprisals against the 25-million Negro population 


42 


of the USA, the racist terror reigning in South Africa and 
Rhodesia, persecution of the Arab population on the occu- 
pied territories and in Israel, racial and national discrimi- 
nation, Zionism and anti-Semitism which are being whip- 
ped up by the reactionary capitalist forces as a means of 
political disorientation of the masses.” | 
Shame on the Israeli militarists! Stop aggression in the 

Middle East! 

A. SOLOMONOVICH, Doctor of Engineering, de- 

partment chief at the Physics Institute, USSR Aca- 
Moscow demy of Sciences 


The news of Israeli outrages on Arab lands fills us with 
wrath and indignation. The rapacious aspirations of the 
Israeli hierarchy are akin to the nazi plans for conquering 
“lebensraum.” Seeking to deceive more and more people 
into going to Israel to swell the numbers of the exploited 
and provide more cannon fodder for the Israeli army, they 
have the nerve to come out as “defenders” of Soviet Jews, 
declaring their intention, as did Golda Meir, to secure for 
us the right “to move” to Israel. Soviet citizens of Jewish 
extraction are outraged by such insinuations. 

Let those in Tel Aviv know once and for all and in- 
form their imperialist patrons accordingly that everyone of 
us has only one motherland—the Soviet Union—where we 
were born and brought up in a spirit of proletarian inter- 
nationalism, where we received our education and work in 
a united fraternal family of the Soviet peoples. 

Despite all their moves and subterfuges, the Zionist bark- 
ers and uncalled-for “defenders” will fail to lead us astray 
or wrest us from our beloved motherland. You are trying 
in vain, Messrs. Zionists! 

Professor R. BRODSKY, 


Doctor of History, 
Lvov Lvov University 


People of my generation, brought up in the Young Pio- 
neer and Young Communist League organizations in a spi- 


23* 43 


rit of internationalism, have never felt the need for a Zion- 
ist “paradise.” 


My homeland is the Soviet Union. Here I was born 
and educated at the institute and post-graduate courses. 
I defended my country during the Great Patriotic War. One 
of my brothers was killed at the front. Nazis murdered my 
father and mother in the Bryansk region. Today the Israeli 
aggressors employing nazi methods are trying to spread the 
plague of racialism beyond the bounds of their country, to 
incite national strife among the peoples of the socialist 
countries. 


I. LERMAN, 

Candidate of Philology, head of 

the Philology Faculty, Khabarovsk 

Khabarovsk Teachers’ Training Institute 


When the Great Patriotic War began, I, a Jew by na- 
tionality, served in a volunteer batallion together with a 
Ukrainian, Platon Voronko, who was second-in-command 
of a platoon, a Russian, Sergei Narovchatov, the batallion 
commissar, and a Georgian Georgi Lomidze, a private. My 
direct C. O. was a Russian, Mikhail Lukonin, my school pal. 
They are all well-known writers today. Our friendship has 
withstood all trials and has remained unbreakable. We are 
all children of one mother country, having the same un- 
shakable communist views and goals. The Zionist ring-lead- 
ers would be glad to sow discord among us, people of 
different nationalities; they would like to have me betray 
our cherished friendship. 

I often recite my poems to Volgograd audiences and 
see before me the friendly inspired faces of my listeners, in- 
habitants of that heroic city on the Volga. I love these 
people, their radiant faces, their magnanimity, their stur- 
diness. I have been writing for Stalingrad papers and maga- 
zines for 37 years now. Now the murderers of Arab child- 
ren—Golda Meir and other Zionist rulers—would like me 
to turn to be a snake traitor to the Volga and the people of 
Stalingrad. From top of Mamayev Hill, the monument to 
the fortitude, courage and heroism of the Soviet people. 


44 


I hurl in the face of the Zionist aggressors the words of 
anger and contempt: 
Stop your aggressive war! Stop your dirty provocations! 


Yuri OKUNEV, 
writer, member of the bureau of 


the Volgograd branch of the RSFSR 
Volgograd (Stalingrad) Writers’ Union 


Again blood is being shed, again Arabs are being per- 
secuted, their only guilt being that they are defending their 
freedom and independence. Israel’s aggressive policy, en- 
couraged by US imperialists, arouses anger and indignation 
among all honest people of the world who express their 
solidarity with the Arab peoples, demand a stop to atroci- 
ties perpetrated by the Israeli military and approve and 
support the policy of the Communist Party and Soviet Go- 
vernment for securing peace in the Middle East. 

Zionist propaganda has expended considerable means 
and efforts of late to create the myth of a “promised land.” 
Madame Golda Meir applies herself to this business with 
particular zeal, feigning special concern over Soviet Jews, 
citizens of the multinational Soviet state, free and equal 
members of socialist society. One would like to ask who 
has authorized her to be so concerned about Soviet Jews as 
to give them such a fervent invitation to the Israeli “para- 
dise.” Perhaps she is doing so because the Tel Aviv rulers 
experience a shortage of cannon fodder to continue their 
aggressive expansionist policy? 

The shrill outcries raised in the “promised land’ about 
discrimination against Jews in the Soviet Union and about 
anti-Semitism in the socialist countries sound very funny to 
Soviet people. Soviet Jews ardently love their country and 
are building a communist society together with all other 
nationalities. 

Those spreading slander and lies about our great coun- 
try must remember one thing: the lot of slanderers has al- 
ways been a miserable one. Let the Meirs, Dayans and their 


overseas patrons remember that! | 
V. TSIGANKOV, 
stage director of the Maly Theatre, 
Moscow Merited Artiste of the RSFSR 


45 


Zionists are trying to frantically prove that Israel is a 
‘promised land,” that people of Jewish origin can find hap- 
piness there. Particularly zealous in this regard is Madame 
Golda Meir who is persistently urging Jews—Soviet citi- 
zens—to move to Israel. 

Give up, Madame Meir! We Soviet Jews, for whom our 
multinational country is the only motherland, will not res- 
pond to your frantic appeals. 

I was born in the Soviet Union; here I studied, became 
a welder, married. The factory where I work has become a 
second home to me. My comrades elected me chairman of 
the public-run personnel department and a member of the 
factory trade union committee. The factory provided me 
with a comfortable flat, and we were able to afford good 
furniture for it. 

Ponder over these brief lines, Madame Golda Meir, and 
you will learn that it is workmen like me who run our fac- 
tories. 

My family are angered by the actions of the Israeli 
provocateurs. We are confident that the righteous cause of 
the peoples fighting for progress, independence and freedom 
will triumph. 

M. BUNSHAFT, 


gas-welder at prefabricated houses 
Moscow factory No. 21 


Tel Aviv alleges that Soviet Jews are deprived of all 
rights, that their dignity is infringed and trampled upon. 
With such lying assertions the Israeli chauvinists are urging 
Soviet Jews to renounce their real motherland. In doing so 
they ignore the fact that people of all nationalities living 
in the Soviet Union are granted the right to work, to study 
and rest, that they are all participating in socialist construc- 
tion. One has to remind them that the Soviet Union is our 
only motherland, the motherland which Soviet Jews helped 
to defend during the Great Patriotic War and that many 
of them were awarded the honorary title of Hero of the 
Soviet Union. 


46 


Only despicable renegades may respond to the appeals 
and invitations of Golda Meir and her associates and move 
to a country whose rulers enjoy the support of capitalist 
states in their aggressive pursuits. 

Like all Soviet people, I am deeply incensed at the out- 
rages committed by the Israeli military against the Arab 
peoples and wholeheartedly support the Soviet Union’s po- 
licy for peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict. 


A. VOVSI, 
Moscow People’s Artiste of the RSFSR 


% 8 % 


My biography is that of an ordinary Soviet man. I was 
born in the Zhitomir region into a poor Jewish family. I 
grew up in Soviet times. The Soviet Union is my beloved 
motherland which I defended in the Great Patriotic War. 
I do not have, and do. not wish to have, any other mother- 
land. Now Israeli Prime Minister:Golda Meir is “inviting”’ 
Soviet Jews to Israel, claiming concern over their fate. 

We know full well the price of this “invitation.” Ma- 
dame Golda Meir wants me, my sons and my compatriots, to 
fight in the name of the absurd Zionist idea of “Greater Is- 
rael from the Nile to the Euphrates.” Our answer is: she 
will never get Soviet Jews to become Tel Aviv’s cannon 
fodder. We are ready, together with the entire Soviet peo- 
ple, to fight for: our Soviet motherland, as we fought for 
it during the Great October Socialist Revolution, the Civil 
War and the Great Patriotic War, together with the Rus- 
sians, Ukrainians, Azerbaijanians, Georgians and other 
peoples of our country. 

I was a battery commander during the Great Patriotic 
War and was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. 
I often ponder over the question: What would have become 
of me had I not lived under Soviet rule? Most likely, I 
would have become a small town shoemaker like my father 
whose family hungered seven days a week. Soviet Govern- 
ment provided me with the opportunity of finishing Baku 
military school. After the army I returned to Azerbaijan 
where I went to a trade school and then graduated from the 
Institute of Soviet Commerce in Moscow. I have been the 
director of foodstore No. 3 for many years now and have 


47 


received due credit for my work. I have been elected de- 
puty to the Nasimin District Soviet. 

Together with all Soviet people I resolutely condemn 
the Israeli aggressors and their imperialist patrons, their 
provocationist actions against our motherland. 


M. SHAKHNOVICH, 
Hero of the Soviet Union, 
Baku director of foodstore No. 3 


I was outraged at Golda Meir’s insolent call on Soviet 
Jews to go to Israel. How could we go to the people who 
have forgotten the cruelty of Hitler fascists? And judging 
by present Israeli actions, they are not much different from 
fascist thugs. 

I was born in Poland and when fascists came I had to 
flee to the Soviet Union which became my second homeland. 
The Soviet Government has given me an apartment, a good 
job, and helped me to raise my children. I am a senior shop 
attendant and my colleagues respect me. I will be provided 
for in my old age, as is every person in our country, and 
am not worried about the future of my children. I am sure 
that in our country no honest Jew will accept Mrs. Meir’s 
irresponsible offer. Better stop worrying about us, Mrs. Meir, 


and mind your own business. 
| T. SHTERENZEER, 
Morshansk, senior shop attendant 

Tambov region 


The village where I live is called Waldheim, which in 
Yiddish means “Forest Hut.” When settlers first came here 
forty years ago there was only one hut amidst a swampy 
stretch of the taiga. Today Waldheim is a big, beautiful 
village with sturdy houses, the centre of the “Zavety Ily- 
icha” (Lenin’s behests), a rich collective farm. 

It is a particle of our “Soviet miracle” which we created 
with our own hands. It is our homeland. Golda Meir’s hys- 
terical wailing only makes us laugh. What do Israeli impe- 


48 


rialists need us for? To use us as cannon fodder in military 

adventures? I was a soldier and I know what war is. 
As a former soldier, a Soviet citizen and a Communist 

I say to the Israeli rulers: no, Messrs. Zionists, I refuse 


to be your soldier! 
V. I. PELLER, 
Hero of Socialist Labour, 
chairman of the “Zavety Ilyicha” 
Birobidzhan collective farm 


You, Mrs. Meir, must know what war means. The last 
war took the lives of some 50 million, among whom there 
was quite a number of Jews from many countries. This is 
something no honest person will forget. Mothers are still 
weeping for lost ones, and you Mrs. Meir, and the leadership 
of the world Zionist organization have made a deal with 
the imperialists and are again fanning the flames of war, 
engaging in barbarous practices and repeating nazi crimes. 

As for the aspersions the world Zionist organization is 
casting on our country and your own statement on the po- 
sition of Jews in the Soviet Union, I’d like to tell you this: 
spare your energy, no one will go to your paradise! 


Professor R. POLYAK, 

Doctor of Medicine, 

Head of surgery chair, 

Stavropol Medical 

Stavropol Institute 


I have been a cultural worker for more than 35 years 
and for the past 20 years have been to the House of Cul- 
ture of the “Stankolit,” “Borets,’ and “Spetstanok”’ plants 
practically every day. As a Jew, I have always felt myself 
an equal member of the multinational family of Soviet peo- 
ples. The House of Culture which I supervise has been prais- 
ed time and again for its work. 

My wife is a teacher. My two daughters have a higher 
education. 

How can Tel Aviv rulers spread the base lie that we 


49 


Jews eke out a miserly existence in the Soviet Union? Gol- 
da Meir has undertaken to be our benefactor and is cyni- 
cally inviting us to her Israeli “paradise”. The Israeli rulers 
want cannon fodder to kill women, old folk and children in 
the name of “great Israel.” You will not have things your 
way. We do not go along with you, Meir and Dayan, or 


your overseas protectors! 
N. VILENSKY, Honoured 
Worker in Culture, 
Moscow RSF 


Pe ne 


I am a pensioner, a Jew by nationality. All my sons are 
Communists. One is a prosecutor and the others, too, hold 
prominent positions. And we shall never allow overween- 
ing Israeli leaders to offend our dignity as Soviet citizens. 
We censure the Israeli invaders headed by Golda Meir. It 
is no use extending to us her hands stained with the blood 
of the Arab peoples. 

We have never lived in Israel and do not intend to live 
there. Our homeland is our Soviet Union, a land where we 
live now and which we defended from the fascist invaders. 
Our true protector is the Soviet Government and Soviet sys- 
tem which we won at the cost of bloodshed, and which gave 
Soviet citizens a happy life. 

There is no national discrimination in our country. We 
are all equal—equal with respect to studies, work, elections. 
Why should Tel Aviv need us Soviet Jews now? The ans- 
wer is obvious: they haven’t enough cannon fodder and they 
want us as replenishments. But that’s out of the question. 


L. STRONGIN, pensioner, 
Minsk region Pukhovichi district 


¥ 
% 
x 


The Israeli rulers want to entice Soviet Jews into their 
country to build up their cannon fodder reserves and use 
them in their aggression against the Arab people. But, Golda 
Meir and Moshe Dayan, this will never happen. We shall 
not swallow your bait. 


Before the war my parents lived in Przemysl, Poland. 
When the fascists came they killed them. At that time I 
and my older sister lived with my aunt in another city. 
When the Soviet troops liberating Western Ukraine came 
we were taken to a children’s home. 

But our happiness did not last long. On the very first 
day of the war my sister was killed in a bomb explosion. 
They began to evacuate the children. Our train was destroy- 
ed on the way. The five of us—Eisef Staver, Shimon Fu- 
dem, Aron Shimon, Yankel Vaserman and myself—fled to 
the woods. The oldest, Yankel, was 14. For three days we 
roamed hungry, then ran into fascists and were put in a 
concentration camp. I was sent to Auschwitz. In the four 
years I was there I saw horrors that still haunt me today. 
Soviet troops saved me from imminent death. 

You Golda Meir want me, a Soviet citizen, to “return” 
to my alleged homeland—Israel. But it has never been and 
never will be my homeland. Are your provocations against 
the Arabs, the seizure of their land and property and the 
killing of civilians any different from nazi atrocities in the 
occupied territories? It is the Arab people who fight for a 
righteous cause and they will win out, giving Israeli pro- 
vocateurs a fitting rebuff. 


S. KUPINSKY, 
Leninsk-Kuznetsk “Iskra” collective 
district, farm 


Kemerovo region 


Like all Soviet people we are incensed at the Israeli 
aggressors who are destroying towns and villages of civilian 
Arabs. We brand them with disgrace and demand: “Hands 
off the Arab peoples! Get out of Arab lands!” Let the Is- 
raeli aggressors remember that all upright people, all who 
cherish peace, are on the side of the Arabs. 


ZHUKOV, LYASETSKY, MALTSEV 

and other drivers, 

22nd CPSU Congress state 

Kalinin region farm 


61 


It is the first time I am writing to a newspaper. Golda 
Meir urges Jews to “return” to Israel. Just what does she 
mean? 

To my mind, one can return home, to one’s country. And 
the Soviet people have one homeland, the Soviet Union. 

I am 42. I was brought up by my country. Never have 
I made a difference between people on nationality grounds, 
but judged them by what they are as persons. I lost all 
my family when I was 13. My father and brother were 
killed in the war and my mother and sister, in a bombing. 
But I forgot my loneliness because I always felt Soviet peo- 
ple’s warmth and sympathy. 

My husband is Russian and I am a Jew. Our son is 22. 
He has returned after serving in the Soviet Army and is 
now working. We are a family of workers. My husband is 
a fitter and I work at a house maintenance office. We are 
a happy family. 

Can it be that the people of Israel have forgotten the 
horrors of the war or haven’t seen Hitlerism for themselves? 
Their Government has seized other people’s lands and beli- 
eves it had the right to. The atrocities they are committing 
on Arab land are no different from what the nazis did. How 
can this be tolerated? Who gave you the right, Mrs. Meir, 
to offer us your “protection”? Who asked for it? 


Moscow B. VOROBYOVA 


I am shocked over Israeli raids and bombings of civi- 
lians, particularly the bombing of the metal works near 
Cairo. I resolutely condemn the US-backed Israeli policy 
and demand that troops be withdrawn from Arab territo- 
ries. I approve and support the Soviet Government and the 
Communist Party in their efforts to settle the Middle East 


conflict. 
. OLEFIR, 
worker at the “Sadovod” 
Orenburg region state farm 


52 


Dear editors, 

I would like you to write in your paper that IJ, S. M. Edel- 
man, Jewish, am an equal citizen of the great Soviet Union. 

I have heard about the atrocities committed by Israeli 
extremists against the Arab people and [ join in the pro- 
test voiced by the Soviet people and all progressive huma- 
nity. The time will come when the aggressors will get due 
punishment for their crimes. We are against violence, war 
and Zionism. 

I ask you to publish my letter. 


Udmurt S. EDELMAN, pensioner, 
Autonomous Republic station “Kuzma” 


I have learned about this provocative invitation from a 
news report on the press conference given by Jews holding 
prominent positions in our socialist society—scientists, ge- 
nerals, people in the arts, recipients of the highest Govern- 
ment awards. Golda Meir mostly urges young people to 
come to Israel. But she was properly told off at the press 
conference: Jews between the ages of 14 and 28 are for the 
most part Komsomol members and they have no use for 
capitalist Israel. 

And this is what I want to ask you: what would I do 
in Israel? I was born and grew up in the Soviet Union and 
was brought up by socialist society. My homeland is the 
USSR. I finished the Berdichev secondary engineering school 
(and, by the way, received a stipend all the years I studied) 
and served in the army for three years. 

All during my studies and army service I was connected 
with the Komsomol. I have been working in this youth or- 
ganization since my return from the army. I like my work 
and I am happy. 

What could you offer me instead, Golda Meir and Moshe 
Dayan? The job of a killer? You say that we are “blood bro- 
thers.” But tell me, could you call the murderer of your 
brother your friend? I do not think so. Then why are you 
friendly with those who annihilated some two million So- 


53 


viet Jews during the war? You find a common language with 
former nazis easily and the Soviet Union, which saved 
millions of Jews from death in Hitler concentration camps 
and crematoria, is Enemy No. 1 to you. And, as the say- 
ing goes, “a man is known by the company he keeps.” 

No, Golda Meir, we are not your friends! I would like 
your namesake, the Chairman of the League of Protection 
of Jews, to hear this too. Until now we Soviet Jews have 
lived without your protection, and I must say, lived well. 
We do not need your “protection.” We have no one to 
fear in our free, multinational country, we repudiate your 
dirty actions, your provocations. We have our protection— 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, our Communist 
Party, our Leninist Komsomol and all our Soviet people. 

Do not ask us to come, gentlemen in Israel! Mind your 
own business. We never knew you and do not wish to. These 
are my feelings and, I am sure, the feelings of all Jewish 
young people in the Soviet Union. 


Berdichev P. GERBER 


Motherland (“Rodina”) is one of the first words a child 
learns after he begins to speak. It brings to mind memories 
of childhood, of the first teacher. Without a motherland 
one is like a bird with a broken wing. The best that one 
does is in the name of the motherland. 

I hear that the gentlemen in Tel Aviv offer us Soviet 
Jews another motherland, Israel. Who gave them the right? 
How dare they encroach on the very dearest that we have? 

I was abroad recently and met Jews from Britain, the 
United States, Israel and other capitalist countries. I find 
it difficult to express how proud I was when I told the 
citizens of other countries the truth about our life, the truth 
which bourgeois propaganda conceals from them. 


Y. GRITSEVSKY, 
student, 
Crimea Medical Institute 


54 


Zionist circles in the United States and Israel are try- 
ing to show that Jews in the Soviet Union are discriminated 
against and invite them to come to Israel, claiming that 
“paradise” is waiting for them there. What “paradise” can 
there be in the world of capitalism, in a state which has 
unleashed a war of aggression against the Arab peoples? 
We Jews living in the Soviet Union know one homeland— 
the country of the October 1917 Socialist Revolution where 
a person of any nationality has every right and opportunity 
to live a truly human life. There is no, nor can there be, 
discrimination against Jews or any other nationality, for 
that would be contrary to the very nature of the Soviet 


State. 
Syzran V. EFROS 


The entire life and work of Soviet Jews vividly proves 
that they are part and parcel of the land on which they 
were born and raised. This land is the Soviet Union, our 


own and only country. 
S. BERNOTSKY, 
director, 
Chapayevsk children’s sports schools 


This is what I would like to say to the Israeli rulers who 
are “concerned” about the fate of Soviet Jews: the ties of 
the Soviet Jews with their only homeland, the Soviet Union, 
are inseparable Alongside other nations, thousands upon 
thousands of Jews laid down their lives in the Great Patri- 
otic War to defend dignity, freedom and independence of 
their homeland. Today, too, Soviet Jews are active and 
loyal workers in all the spheres of communist construction, 
contributing to the prosperity of their Soviet motherland. 


I. MOLIVER, 
director, 
Chapayeusk school No. 9 


55 


The Zionists at the helm of Israel are preaching a policy 
of misanthropy and racial superiority. This is no different 
from nazi theories. The nazis killed my sister, her two small 
children, and all the Jews in our village. I hate nazism and 


Zionism as do all Soviet citizens. . 
Y. DEKHTYAR, 


economist, 
Chapayevsk garment factory No. 10 


Today Israeli Zionists headed by Golda Meir, who have 
sold their conscience for dollars, are gambling on the na- 
tional feelings of Jews and calling on them to rally round 
the banner of revived fascism and aggression against the 
Arab people. It is my firm belief that all honest Jews are as 


indignant at Israel’s heinous policy as I am. 
I. AIZIKOVICH, 


chief conductor, 
Kuibyshev opera house 


The Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality have a home- 
land—the great Soviet Union. We shall never trade our 
socialist homeland for your capitalist “paradise,” Mrs. Meir. 
We shall never forget how the Soviet people, including Je- 
wish citizens, fought to save the peoples of the whole world 
from fascist enslavers. Is it not disgraceful that the Israeli 
rulers have found their protectors among the descendants of 
fascist Germany? 


ABEZGAUZ, MARGULYAN, FRENKIN, GINZ- 


BURG and other employees of the Urals State In- 
stitute of Steel Works Designing 


OO 


Let Israeli extremists and their protectors know that to 
Soviet Jews the Land of Soviets is as dear as their own 


56 


inother. We Jews born in Soviet times know about anti- 
Semitism only from our fathers and grandfathers. It is 
true that where capital is dominant and where the propa- 
ganda machine of millionaires is at work it is possible to 
mislead inexperienced people. But we Soviet citizens—pe- 
ople of any nationality—tell all the Meirs and Dayans: keep 
your advice for those who need it. 


I. KALMANOVICH, employee of 
the Novokuibyshevsk Oil 
Novokuibyshevsk Refinery 


It is difficult to express in words the wrath and indigna- 
tion of the staff of our plant over Israel’s fresh provocations, 
once more manifesting its aggressiveness. The Israeli leaders 
have disgraced themselves in the eyes of all honest people, 
and they will never clear themselves of it. Like all Soviet 
people we demand that the Israeli invaders stop military pro- 
vocations and get out of the Arab lands they have occupied. 


M. IVANOV, N. KUSHNIR, 

A. MUSIN and other 

employees of the 

Riga “Rigaselmash”’ plant 


Really the “concern” of Golda Meir and Co. for Soviet 
Jews is laughable. You think you show concern for Soviet 
Jews, Messrs. Zionists? Go on, enough hypocrisy! Is there 
another country in the world where Jews are equal among 
equals? Is there another country like our socialist land 
where the son of a messenger, an “errand boy” as I was 
can become the assistant director of a big plant? And you 
suggest that we move to your country. Is it to have my chil- 
dren, who are now finishing school, take up arms and de- 
fend your dirty interests? No, we walk different paths. 


Novokuibyshevsk P. GOLDENBERG 
57 


I am an ordinary worker in Leningrad. I lived through 
the blockade during the war, and I say on behalf of my 
whole family: Shame on you, Golda Meir and other Zionists! 
We would not trade our homeland and freedom gained at 
the price of millions of lives! 


I. KRUZHEVADSKY, 


Leningrad driver 


Words fail to express my indignation at the Israeli Go- 
vernment’s statement concerning the “return” of Soviet Jews 
to Israel. I am a Jew, but all of us Soviet citizens have one 
homeland, the Soviet Union, and should it be threatened 
we will all come to its defence. 


A. SHEVTSOVA, 
Izmail teacher 


Israel is a small country and its rulers naturally would 
not have been able to launch aggression against the neigh- 
bouring Arab peoples, would not have risked committing 
such atrocities, had they not been supported by the United 
States, Britain and Federal Germany. 

P. SHEINBAUM, 


Gomel pensioner 


The Israeli Government’s escalation of military opera- 
tions in the Middle East is arousing the condemnation of 
all citizens of the Soviet Union. We are outraged at the 
barbarous bombing of civilian objects and the use of na- 
palm. Israel’s adventurous policy is becoming a threat to 
world peace. 

It is impossible to revise the existing boundaries by 
military force. Tel Aviv must unequivocally abide by the 


58 


Security Council resolution and withdraw its troops from 
the Arab territory it has occupied. This is the only way to 


restore peace in the Middle East. 
Moscow A. FRUMKIN, 


Academician 


Protest and Condemnation 


Protest campaign against Israeli aggres- 
sion and Zionist conspiracy swept the Soviet 
Union. The protesters stigmatized Zionist 
provocateurs and their imperialist patrons. 
The Soviet people unanimously support mea- 
sures initiated by the Soviet Government for 
the restoration of peace in the Middle East. 


BIROBIDZHAN. The Birobidzhan City Soviet 
of Working People’s Deputies met in session and unani- 
mously adopted a resolution wrathfully condemning Israeli 
aggression. The resolution says in part: 

“International and Israeli imperialism has recently be- 
gun an open anti-Soviet campaign. Golda Meir, Head of the 
Israeli Government, declared that Tel Aviv is trying to pre- 
vail on all Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality to go and 
live in Israel. This statement by the Israeli Prime Minister 
shows that the Israeli rulers are attempting, by an anti-So- 
viet act, to break the ring of political isolation in which 
they have found themselves as a result of continuing ag- 
gression against the Arab countries. 

“Deputies of the City Soviet and the entire population 
of Birobidzhan resent the shameless statement by the Israe- 
li Prime Minister. Soviet Jews have never lived, nor are 
they going to live, in Israel. All those present at the session 
condemned the criminal policy pursued by Israeli adven- 
turists, aided and abetted by US imperialism.” 


RIGA. A protest rally was held at the “Gidrometpri- 
bor” pilot plant in Riga. 


59 


‘We wholeheartedly support the just struggle waged by 
the Arab nations against Israeli invaders, in defence of 
their national interests, against imperialist, neo-colonialist 
and Zionist encroachments,” says the resolution. “The policy 
of animosity and aggression towards the Arab nations will 
not yield dividends for its architects. It is bound to fail. 
And Israeli ruling circles and their imperialist patrons 
that continue to build up tensions in the Middle East ought 
to know this.” 


an? 


ASHKHABAD. Participants in a meeting organiz- 
ed by the Turkmenian Committee for Afro-Asian Solida- 
rity expressed their profound sympathy and friendship for 
the Arab nations. 

Ya. Feldman, Honoured Art Worker of the Turkmeni- 
an SSR, told the meeting: 

“Golda Meir and her followers brazenly urge people of 
Jewish nationality to leave the USSR and go to Israel. They 
will never succeed. I am a Soviet citizen and will never be- 
tray my beloved motherland. The Israeli Zionists will re- 
ceive no support from Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality. 
We condemn the aggressor that made war on the freedom- 
loving Arab people.” 

A resolution expressing solidarity with the struggle of 
the Arab nations was adopted at the meeting. 


+ OU + 


KHABAROVSK. Participants in a peace con- 
ference held in Khabarovsk voiced vehement protest against 
Israeli provocations in the Middle East. 

The unanimously carried resolution stresses that the 
reckless policy of Tel Aviv is encouraged by US imperialists 
who seek to crush the just anti-imperialist struggle waged 
by the Arab peoples. 


+ ot © 
KISHINEV. Protest rallies against imperialist ag- 


gression in the Middle East were held at many Moldavian 
enterprises. 


60 


“We, workers, wholeheartedly support and endorse the 
policy of the Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet Go- 
vernment aimed at settling the dangerous conflict, ensuring 
peace in the Middle East,” says the resolution unanimously 
adopted at a meeting held at the Tiraspol garments factory. 

Angry protest against the barbarous actions of Israeli 
extremists was voiced at a meeting held at the Belsk State 
Pedagogical Institute attended by the faculty and students. 

The resolution adopted at the meeting says in part: 

“The Soviet people who have been through the ordeal 
of war and have suffered from Nazi barbarity understand 
the suffering of the freedom-loving Arab nations. We the- 
refore wholeheartedly support their just struggle against the 
Israeli invaders and condemn nazi-like actions committed 
by the Israeli military against the peaceful Arab popula- 
tion.” 


SMOLENSK. Workers at the Smolensk Knitted 
Fabrics Factory held a protest meeting at which they con- 
demned the provocations carried out by the Israeli military. 
The meeting adopted a resolution approving the policy of 
the Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet Government 
for giving comprehensive aid to the Arab nations in their 
just struggle. 


End the Crimes! 


The world public has learned with indig- 
nation of another barbarous crime committed 
by the Israeli military—the bombing on Ap- 
ril 8 of a school in the Egyptian village of 
Bahr el-Bakr where 30 children and one 
teacher were killed. Soon afterwards 16 chil- 
dren died from wounds. 

We are publishing below statements by 
Soviet public organizations and Soviet citi- 
zens protesting against this monstrous act of 
the Israeli aggressors and demanding that an 
end be put to the crimes of the Zionist extre- 
mists. 


61 


PROFOUND INDIGNATION 


The Soviet Women’s Committee voices profound indig- 
nation on behalf of all women of our country at the new 
monstrous crime committed by the aggressors from Tel 
Aviv. This time the victims of the Israeli military are 
schoolchildren in the Arab village of Bahr el-Bakr. 

This new outrageous act is another proof of the aggres- 
sive nature of the state of Israel. The criminal raids of Is- 
raeli pirates on non-military targets in the United Arab 
Republic were made in the notorious “Phantom” aircraft 
built in the United States. 

Soviet women once again express their solidarity with 
the Arab peoples in their struggle and resolutely demand 
that justice and peace be restored in the Middle East. 


Soviet Women’s Committee 


THE CRIMINALS SHALL NOT ESCAPE 
THE JUDGEMENT OF PEOPLES 


The Israeli military, continuing their policy of brigan- 
dage, have committed another crime. In broadening the 
scope of their aggression against the peaceful population 
of the Arab countries Israeli military fliers, acting on orders 
of the criminal ruling clique in Tel Aviv, made a barbarous 
raid on an elementary school in Bahr el-Bakr, killing and 
wounding many children. This act of vandalism shows once 
again that the Israeli war criminals are following in the 
footsteps of the nazi butchers. 

Soviet peace fighters wrathfully condemn the new mons- 
trous act of the Israeli aggressors and call for severe 
punishment for those guilty of the death of the Arab 
children. 

Human conscience cannot tolerate the crimes committed 
by the Israeli military against the Arab peoples. Let the 
Israeli aggressors and their imperialist patrons know that 
they shall not escape the judgement of the people. 


Soviet Peace Committee 


62 


STATEMENT OF THE USSR UNION 
OF JOURNALISTS 


The Israeli aggressors have committed another crime. 
Only recently the world public wrathfully condemned the 
barbarous bombing of a steel mill in the suburbs of Cairo 
by Israeli aircraft, killing many workers. Now another 
monstrosity has been committed—the bombing of an ele- 
mentary school in Bahr el-Bakr, killing and wounding 77, 
mostly schoolchildren. This is cold-blooded, premeditated 
massacre. 

The crime of the Israeli aggressors must not go unpu- 
nished. Soviet journalists demand an immediate end to the 
barbarous attacks by Israel against peaceful Arab citizens. 
Shame on the vandals from Tel Aviv and their helpers 
who supply them with “Phantoms” and vast sums of money 
in an attempt to prevent a peaceful settlement of the Middle 
East conflict. 


STATEMENT OF THE USSR COMMITTEE 
OF YOUTH ORGANIZATIONS AND THE 
USSR STUDENTS COUNCIL 


The world has learned of another monstrous crime com- 
mitted by the Israeli military. This time the target of bar- 
barous bombing was an_ elementary school in the small 
Egyptian village of Bahr el-Bakr. Thirty children died and 
36 were wounded as a result of the piratical attack. 

This inhuman act of the Israeli military revealed once 
again the aggressive nature of Zionism, a tool of imperialist 
reaction. The extremists in Tel Aviv, with direct support of 
US imperialism, are escalating the war in an attempt to break 
the will of the Arab people to fight, to make them give up 
their legitimate interests. The Israeli extremists spare nei- 
ther old people nor children. They have destroyed houses, 
hospitals, schools and other non-military objects. The crime 
in Bahr el-Bakr, like the crime in Abu Zaabal, fills Soviet 


young people with anger and indignation. The crimes com- 


63 


mitted by the aggressive circles of Israel on Arab soil re- 
mind mankind of the Hitlerites’ atrocities in Krasnukha, 
Khatyn, Lidice and Oradour. 

The barbarous raid of the Israeli aircraft on a school 
has aroused profound indignation on the part of the So- 
viet peoples. 

Soviet youth, together with the entire Soviet people, 
wrathfully condemn the new monstrous crime of the Is- 
raeli Zionists. 

On behalf of Soviet youth, the USSR Committee of 
Youth Organizations and the USSR Students Council voice 
angry protest against the new barbarous action of the Is- 
raeli aggressors and express full support for the just strug- 
gle of the Arab peoples and youth. 


SHAME UPON ISRAELI MURDERERS 
AND THEIR PATRONS 


Soviet working people have learned with profound in- 
dignation of another heinous crime committed by the Is- 
raeli military—the barbarous bombing of a school in the 
Egyptian village of Bahr el-Bakr. Thirty children and one 
teacher died, and dozens of pupils were wounded as a re- 
sult of the new atrocity perpetrated by the Tel Aviv extre- 
mists. [his beastly act of the Israeli military, like the pira- 
tical raid on the civilian industrial enterprise in the Cairo 
suburb of Abu Zaabal in which dozens of workers were kil- 
led, is another monstrous crime that stems from the deli- 
berate policy of the Israeli ruling circles to terrorize the 
population of the United Arab Republic and other Arab 
countries. 

One cannot ignore the fact that this time, as before, the 
latest models of US-built planes were used in massacring 
civilian population. Responsibility for this crime against 
humanity also rests with the US ruling circles acting as di- 
rect helpers and patrons of the insolent Israeli aggressors. 

On behalf of the Soviet working people the All-Union 
Central Council of Trade Unions condoles with the Egyp- 
tian people over the death of children in the village of Bahr 


64 


el-Bakr. Soviet working people and trade unions vigorously 
denounce the aggressive circles in Israel whose crimes re- 
semble the atrocities perpetrated by the Hitlerites in the Se- 
cond World War. We wrathfully condemn Israel’s impe- 
rialist protectors and re-affirm our fraternal solidarity with 
the working people of the United Arab Republic and other 
Arab countries fighting for their freedom and independence, 
against the encroachments of the forces of imperialism, re- 
action and world Zionism. 

Soviet trade unions firmly support the anti-imperialist 
struggle of the Arab peoples and will continue to do eve- 
rything possible to eliminate the consequences of the Is- 
raeli aggression, to bring about a just political settlement 
in the Middle East. 

The AUCCTU offers its deep condolences to all fami- 
lies that have lost their children in the beastly bombing by 
the Israeli aggressors. 


All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions 


A TELEGRAM TO THE UNITED NATIONS 


On behalf of the Soviet Women’s Com- 
mittee and the USSR Academy of Pedagogi- 
cal Sciences, V. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, 
Chairman of the Soviet Women’s Committee, 
and V. Khvostov, President of the USSR 
Academy of Pedagogical Sciences, have sent 
the following telegram to U Thant, Secreta- 
ry-General of the United Nations Organiza- 
tion. 


We request that you make known among UN mem- 
bers our indignation over the atrocious crimes committed 
by the Israeli military, over the murder of children. We 
hope that effective steps will at last be taken to implement 
the Security Council resolution of November 22, 1967, in 
view of the horrible consequences of the failure to carry 
it out. 


3—474 65 


AN INHUMANE CRIME 


Like all Soviet people, members of the Soviet Red Cross 
have learned with profound indignation of another mons- 
trous crime committed by the Israeli military against the 
peaceful population of the United Arab Republic. Accord- 
ing to press reports, Israeli aggressors flying US-built 
“Phantom” aircraft bombed the outskirts of Zagazik in 
Sharkia Province on April 8. The bombs hit the elementary 
school Bahr el-Bakr killing 30 and wounding 36 children. 

The barbarous bombings of civilian targets, the killing 
of peaceful population, including women, old people and 
children, reveal the aggressive nature of the Israeli ruling 
clique which has trampled underfoot the principles of huma- 
nity and commonly accepted moral standards. 

The continuing Israeli atrocities on Arab soil show the 
true face of the arrogant criminals who ignore world pu- 
blic opinion and the appeals and demands of international 
organizations. 

This is also confirmed by the insolent refusal of the 
Israeli authorities to recognize the Fourth Convention on 
the protection of civilian population in the event of war 
despite the fact that the Israeli Government signed all the 
1949 Geneva Conventions. 

On behalf of millions of its members the Executive Com- 
mittee of the Union of the Red Cross and Red Crescent So- 
cieties wrathfully condemns the continuing Israeli aggres- 
sion against the Arab countries and demands an immediate 
end to the criminal war, the withdrawal of the Israeli troops 
from the occupied territories and the establishment of a 
just peace in the Middle East. 

Professor G. MITIREV, 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, 


USSR Union of the Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies 


SHAME ON THE ISRAELI AGGRESSORS! 


We actors of the Moscow Jewish Drama Company reso- 
lutely condemn the aggression of the Israeli military against 
the Arab peoples. 


We consider the acts of the Zionist provocateurs utterly 
disgraceful and demand that a stop be put to the monstrous 
crimes of the Israeli military aided by their patrons in Wa- 
shington. The new outrageous crime of the Israeli aggres- 
sors, the bombing and strafing with rockets of an elementary 
school in the village of Bahr el-Bakr killing and wounding 
77 persons, reminds one of the hitlerite atrocities committed 
during the Second World War. No one can remain indif- 
ferent to the bloody crimes of the air pirates. 

We are particularly indignant at the “tutelage” offered 
by Mrs. Golda Meir with regard to us Soviet Jews. She would 
do much better to think about saving the Jewish people who 
live in Israel and are exposed to real danger owing to the 
provocative policy of the Tel Aviv ruling circles. Mrs. Gol- 
da Meir should not waste her time in making mendacious 
appeals. 

Actors P. AIBINDER, S. BINIK, H. BLINCHEV- 
SKAYA, M. KOTLYAROVA, L. KUPER, 
R. KURTS, N. SIROTINA, M. LEVIT, R. SHVAR- 
TSER, M. GEIKHMAN, S. GOLKOV, Z. KAMIN- 
SKY, N. LEVIT, G. LEVINZON, Z. MEIMAN, 
E. SPIVAK, E. TRAKTOVENKO, M. SHAPIRO; 
V. SHVARTSER, artistic director of the Company 
and Merited Artiste of the Russian Federation 


Wrathful Indignation 


The following are excerpts from nume- 
rous articles printed in the Soviet press after 
the barbarous bombing of an Egyptian school 
in Bahr el-Bakr. 


“The world is shocked by new crimes perpetrated by the 
lel-Aviv aggressors: Israeli aircraft have razed an Egyp- 
tian school killing and wounding scores of children,” says 
a statement issued by the Soviet Lawyers’ Association. 

“This heinous crime results from the predatory, racist 
policy of the Israeli extremists supported by the US impe- 
rialists and following in the footsteps of the nazi killers. 

“Once again mankind is a witness to the fact that the 
policy of racism and aggression leads to criminal actions 
yone the principles of human morals and international 
aw. 


3° 67 


“A quarter of a century ago the Nuremberg Internatio- 
nal Tribunal, acting for the freedom-loving nations, passed 
severe judgement on the leaders of Hitler’s Germany guilty 
of similar crimes. The peoples outlawed for all times crimes 
against humanity which include, according to the statute of 
the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal, crimes aga- 
inst peace—the unleashing and conducting of aggressive 
wars: war crimes, in particular murder and torture of the 
population on occupied territory, senseless destruction of 
villages and towns; crimes against humanity including in the 
first place murders, extermination, enslavement, and other 
atrocities with regard to civilian population and persecution 
on political, racial and religious grounds. 

“Today these commonly recognized standards of inter- 
national law are brazenly violated by the Israeli aggressors. 
The list of the crimes committed by the Israeli military is 
growing, and it is high time to stay the murderers’ hand. 

“Soviet lawyers voice their indignation at the heinous 
actions of the Israeli leaders and call on lawyers in all count- 
ries to raise their voice in protest against the crimes of the 
Israeli aggressors and their helpers.” 


A statement of the Union of Soviet Societies of Friend- 
ship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries says 
that the Israeli ruling circles supported by international 
imperialism brazenly raid peaceful towns and villages of 
the Arab states defending their freedom and independence. 

The crimes of the Israeli military once again show the 
whole world that the Israeli ruling circles in their hatred for 
the peaceful peoples are taking after the nazi butchers. 

Like all Soviet people, the Union of Friendship Societies 
support their Government in the matter of the peaceful sett- 
lement of the Middle East crisis on the basis of the Secu- 
rity Council resolution of November 22, 1967. They confirm 
their solidarity with the Arab nations fighting for the libe- 
ration of the occupied areas from the Israeli aggressors and 
demand that an end be put immediately to the brutal atro- 
cities of the Israeli military and that the Israeli troops be 
unconditionally withdrawn fro mthe occupied regions. 

On behalf of millions of Soviet people the Union of So- 


68 


viet Societies of Friendship and Cultural Relations with Fo- 
reign Countries assures the Arab peoples of their fraternal 
solidarity and support in the struggle to end the Israeli 
aggression, for peace and creative labour in the Middle 
East. 


es 8 & 


Writers A. Barto, S. Mikhalkov, A. Alexin, merited artist 
K. Shah-Azizov, People’s Artiste of the Russian Federation 
I. Semenov and others write in their statement on behalf 
of the Association of Children’s Writers and Artists of the 
Union of Soviet Friendship Societies that the new unprece- 
dented crime of the Israeli military has shocked the whole 
world. The writers and artists demand that the Israeli ag- 
gressors be called to account for their heinous crimes. 


e $F % 


“Nothing the Israeli bandits can say now will excuse the 
bombing of the school, for they knew what they were do- 
ing,” says a joint statement of the RSFSR Ministry of Edu- 
cation, the Moscow Teachers’ College and a group of school 
teachers. “Together with the people of the United Arab Re- 
public we mourn the dead innocent children, we share 
the boundless grief of the Arab people,” says the statement. 
We urge the United Nations at last to demand retribution 
for the atrocities committed by the Israeli rulers on Arab 
territory.” 


More than five hundred students, post-graduates and 
professors and teachers of the Lenin Teachers’ Training 
College in Moscow held a meeting in protest against the 
new provocation of the Israeli military, the barbarous raid 
on the peaceful Arab village, Bahr el-Bakr. 

“On many occasions I have seen evidence of the cri- 
mes perpetrated by the nazis,” said Assistant Professor 
N. Shumilov. “The actions of the Israeli military are a re- 
petition of the nazi atrocities. We teachers well understand 
the indignation of the UAR people. The Israeli extremists 


69 


use the excuse of the “need” to attack military targets to 
murder peaceful population including children.” 

Wrathful speeches were made by student L. Guseva, 
Professor of history D. Baburin and college rector P. Kashu- 
tin. 

“None of us can remain indifferent to this bloody crime,” 
said P. Kashutin. “It cannot be considered apart from the 
general policy pursued by the imperialist powers, in the first 
place the United States. The difference is purely geogra- 
phical. While American soldiers commit murders in Song 
My the Israelites kill people in Bahr el-Bakr.” 

The students, post-graduates and professors voiced 
their solidarity with the UAR people and demanded uncon- 
ditional withdrawal of the aggressor troops from the occu- 
pied territories. 


A mass meeting has been held at the “Start” garments 
factory in Moscow where most of the workers are women. 
The speakers voiced their wrath and indignation at the 
crimes of the Israeli aggressors. 

Laboratory assistant V. A. Revenko emphasized that 
the continued bombing of Arab territories testifies to the 
predatory policy of the Tel Aviv rulers with regard to 
the Arab peoples. 

“We, women workers making clothes for children are 
pained to hear this sad news. We denounce the Israeli ag- 
gressors bringing death to Arab women and children,” she 
said. 

The meeting passed a resolution condemning the hei- 
nous crime of the Israeli military. 


of 
3 
ya 


“There is no limit to our indignation at the aggressive 
policy of the Israeli military committing aggression in the 
Middle East. It makes our hearts bleed to hear of the 
tragedy in the Egyptian village, Bahr el-Bakr,” says a let- 
ter written by Shumova, Merited Teacher of the Ukrainian 
Soviet Republic, Kovalenko, secretary of the Party bureau, 
and Pshenichnaya, chairman of the trade union organiza- 


70 


tion, on behalf of the teachers of school No. 117 named 
after Lesya Ukrainka, in Kiev. “The atrocities of the Israe- 
li military can be compared with the brown plague of Na- 
zism. We brand with shame Zionism and those who raised 
their hand against innocent children and peaceful towns- 
people and villagers, those who threaten peace on earth.” 


The instructors and students of vocational school No. 39 
in Stupino, Moscow region, also expressed their protest and 
indignation. “Having learned of the new monstrous crime 
of the Israeli military which brought death to children and 
adults we voice our profound indignation,” they write. 


“The crimes committed by the Israeli hangmen on Arab 
soil bring to one’s mind the Nazi’s atrocities on occupied 
Soviet territory during the Second World War,” writes 
I. Lizogubova, Merited Teacher of the Russian Federation 
living in Moscow. “In 1941, I was an eighth-former and I 
still remember lessons during a blackout when the school 
shook from bomb explosions,” she writes. 

‘“‘Now when it seemed that guns had been silenced fore- 
ver and bombs had ceased to explode, once again people are 
being killed and blood is being shed. There is no limit to 
the outrages of the Israeli aggressors who do not stop at 
killing children to attain their aims. 

“We Soviet teachers and all those who have devoted 
their lives to children wrathfully demand that an end be 
put to the crimes of the Israeli military and punishment be 
meted out to those guilty of the heinous murders!” 


“The personnel of the Ministry of Education and all 
teachers of the Ukrainian Republic are shocked by the new 
infamous crime of the Israeli military,” writes Udovichenko, 
Minister of Education of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Re- 


“1 


public. “The barbarous bombing of the Egyptian elementary 
school at Bahr el-Bakr is no less cruel than the atrocities of 
the nazi monsters.” 


“The personnel of the All-Union Research Institute of 
Vocational Training express their profound indignation at 
another monstrous crime of the Israeli military, the wanton 
killing of children at Bahr el-Bakr,” write Institute director 
Skorodumov and Party bureau secretary Simonova from 
Leningrad. 


The teachers and pupils of secondary school No. 1 in 
Tbilisi, capital of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
wrote an indignant letter protesting the barbarous and cri- 
minal bombing by the Israeli aggressors of a school in the 


United Arab Republic. 


I. THE MYTH OF THE 
“PROMISED LAND’ 


At various times Soviet Jewish citizens 
had left the Soviet Union for Israel. Influ- 
enced by Zionist propaganda they truly be- 
lieved that Israel was the homeland of the 
Jewish people. They had hoped to reunite 
with their relatives there, in the “promised 
land,” and start a new life. 

But in time their hopes turned into bitter 
disappointment. The former Soviet citizens, 
accustomed to the Soviet way of life whose 
motto is “Everything for Man,” found them- 
selves in an alien atmosphere. 

Their letters addressed to the Soviet Go- 
vernment are full of self-reproach. Some of 
these letters and passages from them have 
been published by the Novosti Press Agency. 


Long before war broke out in the Middle East in June 
1967 a group of Soviet citizens, deceived by Tel Aviv's la- 
vish promises, went to Israel. Later they sent the following 
message to the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium. 

“We, Soviet Jews, former Soviet citizens, sincerely ask 
you to allow us to return to our motherland—the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics. 

‘We arrived in Israel at different times, deceived by 
the utterly false Zionist propaganda about the Palestinian 
Jewish paradise. We were promised sundry blessings: jobs, 
flats, etc., even class harmony. 

“Life in Israel and our own bitter experiences here show 


3B—474 q3 


that Zionism does not correspond to the interests of working 
Jews; in fact, they are in sharp conflict. Zionism is the ideo- 
logy of the big Jewish bourgeoisie serving the US imperia- 
lists. 

“Ruthless class exploitation covered up by jingoistic 
slogans (instead of ‘class harmony’) prevails in Israel.” 

In early 1970 Abram Cherchis, an ex-resident of Odessa 
and a former Soviet citizen, wrote from Israel expressing si- 
milar feelings. His letter, addressed to the USSR Supreme 
Soviet, in which he asked for permission to return to the 
Soviet Union was circulated by the Soviet mission at the 
UN on March 19. 

What made Abram Cherchis leave Israel? And why did 
he decide to return to the Soviet Union? This is what his 
relatives and friends had to tell: 

Cherchis was brought up in an orphanage, studied to 
become a wine-maker, fought in the war with Finland (1940) 
and the Great Patriotic war against nazi Germany, and was 
awarded government decorations. In 1945 he was demobi- 
lized and returned to his former peacetime occupation. Ab- 
ram Lazarevich was respected by his colleagues and consi- 
dered an excellent worker. Cherchis had a good salary, a 
three-room flat, and a car. In 1967 he retired from his job 
as a factory shop superintendant and went on pension. He 
got a maximum pension of 120 roubles. His elder son Ilya 
is a well-known wrestler and a Merited Master of Sports. 
His other son Leonid finished secondary school and was 
drafted. His daughter Svetlana also had a secondary edu- 
cation. 

In the last few years letters began pouring in from his 
mother-in-law who lived in Israel. They literally upset his 
family life. The old woman complained about ill health and 
loneliness and urged her daughter to go to Israel. She prais- 
ed the life there, listing all the blessings awaiting those who 
would go to the land of their fathers. At long last Abram’s 
wife decided to go. 

Abram Cherchis put little trust in the stories about the 
paradise awaiting them in Israel, but he failed to dissuade 
his wife from going. 

On May 29, 1969 the Cherchises and their daughter (the 
sons flatly refused to go) set out for Israel. 

Soon after his arrival in Israel Abram Lazarevich wrote 
to his sons and brother Yefim that he had made a fatal mis- 


74 


take, that life in a capitalist country was unbearable. Ab- 
ram wrote that he had applied to Soviet authorities to help 
him return to the Soviet Union which “is the most just 
country and where everything is done for the good of the 
oo and not just a handful of the rich as in capitalist 
srael.” 

In late March 1970 the USSR Supreme Soviet satisfied 
his request: Soviet citizenship was restored to him and he 
was granted permission to return to the Soviet Union. 


In late 1969 Semyon Palatnik, who works in the Odes- 
sa Polytechnical Institute, received a letter from his sister 
who had gone to Israel at the invitation of her relatives 
there. She wrote the following: 

“My dear Senechka, I have been in the ‘wonderland’ for 
four months now, but I could not compose myself and write 
you a letter, because there is nothing good here and I didn’t 
want to write about what was bad. I first thought things 
would work out. But alas! Many things here irritate us, we 
cannot get used to them and never will. 

“We, people who were born and educated in the So- 
viet Union and had lived there for so many years, cannot 
stand the order of things here, in a capitalist country. You 
cannot understand this, being so far away. But if you should 
see it for yourself, you would realize. .. Lenya is ill. If he 
doesn’t get better, I don’t know what I’ll do. My nerves are 
strained. Homesickness must have complicated his illness, 
he misses his country, his friends. I shall never forgive my- 
self for what I’ve done. I have ruined our life and what 
for? I kept this letter unsent for more than a month, because 
I did not want to worry you, but unfortunately there is no 
other way out. If possible, send a parcel for mother, that’s 
her request. We shall try to get permission to come home. 
Please help us in this. 

SPECTOR A. D. 
Flat 5, 12 Izhock Sade Street, 
Jazur, Israel” 

Another letter by Palatnik’s sister ends with the follow- 
ing words: “If I manage to come back to my country I shall 
cry from the highest tower: ‘What a boon it is to bea Soviet 
citizen!’ ” 


3B* 15 


In mid-1969 Sh. I. Monastyrsky, a pensioner and resi- 
dent of Odessa (Krasnyi Pereulok 4), wrote to the Soviet Red 
Cross Society asking the society to help his relatives. 

Natan, his son-in-law, had gone to his relatives in Is- 
rael two years previously. Natan’s wife and their two child- 
ren at first refused to leave the Soviet Union. But she did 
not want her children to be fatherless and finally agreed to 
join her husband. And now she curses the day when she 
decided to take that step and begs her father to help her get 
permission to return to her native land. 


“Natan made a great mistake when he came here. He 
is now very sorry. Life is hard here. We were swindled, and 
our life is ruined,” writes Monastyrsky’s daughter. “It is so 
difficult to leave this country, it takes money. But where 
shall we get it? Medical aid is costly, so is schooling; educa- 
tion is substandard. Natan gets subsistence wages, not 
enough to pay for Sasha’s music lessons. Only fools would 
want to leave our native town. We now live in an out-of-the 
way village. I am homesick, the whole thing is extremely 
painful to me.” 


In another letter she writes: “I am heartbroken, I shall 
probably never be well again. I dream of returning. I would 
give up everything to bring back my recent past which is 
now irretrievably lost. I suffer greatly. I am so homesick... 
There is nothing more dreadful than life in a foreign land. 
What have I to do with this land? It is alien to me, its peo- 
ple, language, nature. To understand me you'll have to 
live here. I think of home all the time. Even strangers tell 
me I was wrong to have come here. .. When I wake up in the 
morning and realize I am in Israel and that everything is 
lost I feel like wailing. What have I done! Some people here 
have been Israeli residents for 20 years now and they are 
sorry they came here... My God! I would be happy if only 
J could go and live somewhere else. J would be overwhelm- 
ed with joy if I could come home... Every day we listen to 
Radio Moscow and feel so homesick. Children must have a 
father, but it would be better for them to be fatherless than 
live here.” 


Monastyrsky’s daughter wrote bitterly in one of her last 
letters: “I do not understand people who would want to 


46 


live outside the USSR. For nostalgia is a sickness, a cancer 
of the soul which gradually kills a man.” 


Physician Ioffe Semyon Zalmanovich, his wife Hava and 
their son Benyamin, aged 15, formerly lived in Riga. They 
wrote the following from Israel in their letter to the Chair- 
man of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet: “We 
have made a grave mistake; we have taken a thoughtless 
and silly step. We shall never forgive ourselves. We have 
ruined our life and the life of our son who, being so young, 
is not guilty. After we came here we saw that the country 
faithfully serves US imperialism and acts as its agent in the 
Middle East. 

“My wife’s sister persuaded us into coming to Israel. 
She has deceived us. We have broken with her completely. .. 
We ask you to allow us to return to our native land—the 
USSR, so that our son can go to a Soviet school and be- 
come a useful citizen of his socialist motherland. My wife 
and I will give all our energy and knowledge for the be- 
nefit and prosperity of our beloved Soviet Land. 


SEMYON, HAVA, BENYAMIN IOFFE, Flat 12, 
56 Tsahil Street, Petah Tikwa, Israel” 


The marriage of Benedicta Tskavzaradze (a former resi- 
dent of the city of Batumi, Soviet Georgia) was a failure. 
After her divorce Benedicta Tskavzaradze went with her 
two children to Israel where her mother lived. 

She was a deeply religious woman—a fact which influ- 
enced her decision to go to Israel. In late 1969 she sent a 
letter to the USSR Supreme Soviet in which she asked for 
permission to return to the Soviet Union. Enclosed with the 
letter was an appeal addressed to “any Soviet press organ” 
which reads in part: “I appeal to all Soviet Jews irrespec- 
tive of age, occupation or faith. 

“Jews! Stay in the USSR, kiss Russian soil thrice every 
day and pray to your ancestors that they may protect you 


77 


from the mistake I made: I left my home and native land, 
my friends and my job: now IJ have lost my freedom and the 
right to be a human being, the right to education and me- 
dical attention. 

“IT have brought my children to the land of Israel where 
they are labelled ‘goys’ because their father is not a Jew. 
This bars them from school unless they are circumcised. 

“I have come to Israel to scrub floors for my rich ‘bre- 
thren in faith.’ People who wish to return to the USSR (they 
are in the majority in our community) are persecuted by 
the Bitahon (security police). 

“My neighbours—Rozenberg from Riga, Vekeris from 
Moldavia, Paikin from Riga, Benasher from Vilnius—curse 
the day they came to Israel and have all applied for re- 
turn visas. Forty per cent of Soviet immigrants suffer from 
heart trouble because of the hot climate and the icy indiffe- 
rence of Israeli residents. 

“Jews! Don’t be fools! Listen to Radio Moscow and not 
to Kol Israel. 

“IT also appeal to competent Soviet agencies: forgive me 
ot ey grave mistake; do not let my children perish in Is- 
rael! 


ltl. SERVANT TO IMPERIALIST REACTION. 
AN INSTRUMENT OF MASS-SCALE 
BLACKMAIL AND DECEIT 


Below are articles on Zionism taken from 
the Soviet press. In them Zionism is seen as 
an ideology hostile to the interests of peo- 
ples, including the people of Israel, and as 
one of the major tools of international im- 
perialist reaction. 


Zionism, a Tool of Imperialism 


Zionism may be considered an economic, political and 
military corporation which has placed itself at the service 
of national exploiting classes, on the one hand, and world 
imperialism, especially US imperialism, on the other. 

I shall not go in detail into the history of the rise of 
Zionism. In the nineties of the last century when the Aus- 
trian journalist, ‘Theodore Herzl, published his book Jewish 
State, which international Zionism later used as its ideolo- 
gical “manifesto,” hardly anyone had any doubts as to the 
class nature of this “teaching.” What were the ideas which 
Herzl and later his followers “disclosed” to the world? They 
were to unite all Jews living in various countries and 
to have them settled in the “promised land,” and to esta- 
blish a “classless” society there. And so instead of an irre- 
concilable class struggle there is the “harmony of classes’, 
instead of the toppling of the bourgeoisie and the establish- 
ment of the dictatorship of the proletariat there is the ‘“‘su- 
praclass Jewry’; in brief, what we had there was an open 
call for the isolation of Jewish working people from the 


79 


vigorously developing proletarian movement in the coun- 
tries where they lived and, ultimately, for using them against 
this movement. 

It was clear from the very beginning that international 
Zionism—organizationally, it came into being in 1897 in 
the Swiss city of Basel where the World Zionist Organiza- 
tion was formed—was aimed against socialist goals, against 
Marxism. Already in 1903, Lenin pointed out in his work 
The Position of the Bund in the Party that “this Zionist idea 
is absolutely false and essentially reactionary.” 

No wonder Zionism has made its nests in the most reac- 
tionary establishments of big monopoly capital in the USA, 
Britain, the FRG and a number of other countries. Zionist 
activities are extremely diverse, ranging from religious 
propaganda to espionage for Western intelligence services, 
from preachings of “universal Jewry” to political murders. 

Let us look into just a few pages of the history of in- 
ternational Zionism, which record a fair number of disgra- 
ceful and foul actions. “Rich Jews, now compelled to hide 
their treasures and feast with the shutters closed, will be 
able to enjoy life in their own state freely...” These words 
were written by Herzl, the “spiritual father” of Zionism, to- 
wards the end of the last century. Yet, in order to have 
feasts, according to Herzl, one should be a subordinate and 
put aside humane principles and morality. No wonder the 
“spiritual father” of Zionism was once on very friendly 
terms with Wilhelm II, and some of Herzl’s successors were 
in agreement with Hitler. You will say that this is going too 
far. But believe it or not, this is a fact. Der Spiegel, the West 
German magazine, in its issue of December 19, 1966, had 
the following to say: “The victory of the German anti-Se- 
mites was for the Zionists a matter of great joy (the sei- 
zure of power by Hitler—L. U.). They immediately saw in it 
a defeat of enlightened Western Jewry who did not care a 
straw about Zionism and preferred to live and develop 
amidst other nations... Inasmuch as the Zionists and na- 
zis both considered the question of race and the nation to 
be more important than anything else, there should inevi- 
tably have appeared a link between them.” According to 
the same magazine, the chief of the department for Jewish 
affairs of the nazi intelligence service, von Mildenstein, 
promoted the activities of Zionist organizations by setting 
up camps for re-education where young Jews were trained 


80 


for work in Palestine. Secret agent Reichert of the German 
Bureau of Information in Palestine, on instructions from 
his chiefs, was in contact with one of the main leaders of 
a secret Zionist organization. .. 

One may also mention the so-called affair of the former 
Chairman of the Zionist Committee for the Salvation of 
Hungarian Jews, Dr. Kastner, as reported in Israeli news- 
papers in 1953. During the trial, which had to do with the 
insult received by Dr. Kastner from M. Grinwald, another 
Israeli citizen, Kastner had to admit that he had maintained 
direct contacts with the nazi leaders who were engaged in 
“exterminating” half a million Hungarian Jews and that he 
had known of the nazi plans in advance but had kept silence 
allegedly in order to save the lives of certain “Zionist actt- 
vists.” 

Today Zionists avoid recalling the fact that nazi thugs 
hurled Jewish children into the furnaces at Auschwitz and 
Majdanek or used them as “material” for experiments con- 
ducted by doctor-cannibals in SS uniforms. True, one should 
also do justice to the neo-nazis in present day Bonn: they 
did not feel hurt for very long that Adolf Eichmann was 
hanged in Tel Aviv. Business is business! 

Zionism means anti-communism in action, and for this 
the imperialists of the USA, the FRG, Britain and some 
aie countries are ready to pay in cash and forget old of- 

ences. 

Zionism is the theory and practice of aggression against 
the Arab states for the purpose of liquidating progressive 
Arab regimes. Of course, Western imperialist circles, above 
all those in the United States, try to present matters in such 
a way as to suggest that Israel “acted alone” when it star- 
ted the war against the Arab states allegedly in order to 
defend the existence of the “peaceful refuge of the Jews” 
who had congregated at the hill of Zion with the aim of 
carrying out the behests of the Old Testament. But the 
events that took place after June 1967 made even the most 
devoted followers of the Old Testament see things in their 
true light. Could the Mount of Zion have meant much, when 
Shimon Perez, the former Israeli Deputy Defence Minister, 
declared with undisguised cynicism: “It took land forces 
and thousands of pilots 10 years to prepare for the first 
80 minutes of the war.” Well, at least this time he was tell- 
ing the truth. The attack carried out by Israeli militarists 


81 


against the Arab countries had been prepared carefully, and 
in utter secrecy, by world imperialism and Zionism over a 
long period of time, and it had been financed by them too. 
In the early days of the war Tel Aviv received, openly, 
about 1,500 million dollars from a Zionist concern. 

The Zionists have been careful to comouflage their anti- 
democratic activity. They become angry when facts about 
their dirty activity are exposed. Their favourite method of 
defence is to accuse the other side of “anti-Semitism.” 

Actually, the Zionists do not at all regard anti-Semitism 
as an evil, but rather as a boon. Incidentally, the “spiritual 
father” of Zionism, T. Herzl, wrote about this in his diary: 
“In Paris... I started viewing anti-Semitism in a somehow 
broader way; I am beginning to understand it historically 
and forgive it. Moreover, I recognize the futility and un- 
reasonableness of a struggle against anti-Semitism... Besi- 
des, anti-Semitism, being a powerful and rather subconscious 
force, will not harm the Jews. I consider it a movement 
useful for the development of Jewish individuality.” Here 
one cannot but be reminded of the following fact. After 
the formation of the state of Israel, Ben Gurion, a prominent 
leader of international Zionism, ordered his agents to blow 
up a synagogue in Baghdad secretly; this provocation was 
immediately labelled by Israeli propaganda as a “monstrous 
act of Arab anti-Semitism.” That was exactly what the Hit- 
lerites did: they dressed their soldiers in Polish uniforms 
and then organized a “Polish” attack on a German radio 
station in order to start military operations against Poland. 

Zionism is an extremely dangerous phenomenon in our 
time. It serves two masters: the monopoly bourgeoisie of 
Israel and world imperialism, US imperialism, above all. 
By unleashing a war in the Middle East and placing them- 
selves at the service of imperialism, the Zionists are gambl- 
ing with the fate of the Israeli people. That is why all up- 
right working Jews both in Israel and other countries, the 
courageous Communist Party of Israel are demanding that 
an end be put to the aggression inspired by the Zionists in 
the Middle East, and have put forward the following slogan: 
“Not with imperialism against the Arab peoples, but with 
the Arab peoples against imperialism!” 


L. VOLF 
Izvestia, March 10, 1970. 


82 


Class Essence of Zionism 


History shows quite convincingly that when the exploit- 
ing classes, especially the bourgeoisie, strive to indoctri- 
nate the broad masses of people with their ideology they 
do not come out openly and defend their class interests but 
resort to social mimicry and demagogy, passing their inte- 
rests for the interests of the entire people. 

This lesson of history should be borne in mind when 
examining the substance and class nature of Zionist ideo- 
logy. 

Zionism emerged towards the end of the 19th century 
with a widely publicized programme of “complete” solu- 
tion of the “Jewish problem” through the establishment of 
a national Jewish state on the territory of Palestine which 
had in antiquity been the land where Hebrew society and 
its class state had developed. 

The history of the Jewish people, like that of all other 
peoples, conforms to the general laws of the historical pro- 
cess and the laws of class struggle between the oppressed 
and their oppressors. That is why the exploiting leaders of 
Jewish society have always tried to cover up class contradic- 
tions by patriarchal-paternalist, philanthropic talks, by 
claims that there was allegedly no class division among 
Jews. 

Lenin pointed this out when he wrote that “Among the 
Jews there are working people, and they form the majority. 
They are our brothers, who like us, are oppressed by capi- 
tal; they are our comrades in_ the struggle for socialism. 
Among the Jews there are kulaks, exploiters and capitalists, 
just as there are among the Russians, and among people of 
all nations... 

“ ..Rich Jews, like rich Russians, and the rich in all 
countries, are in alliance to oppress, crush, rob and disunite 
the workers.” 

Zionist ideology tries to make the Jewish question ap- 
pear as something outside history and unchanging. Actual- 
ly, however, the Jewish question, like all social pheno- 
mena, has undergone important changes in the course of 
time epochs. Firstly, two tendencies may be noted in 
the development of Jewish communities: the tendency to- 
wards isolation and the tendency towards association with 


83 


the national majority of the given country. The tendency 
towards association, towards organic merging with the life 
of a given country can be seen particularly clearly in the 
sphere of culture. Jews, having mastered the language of 
the given people, became merged (assimilated) with the ma- 
jority of the population, with the native people. On the other 
hand, the tendency towards isolation was due both to ex- 
ternal factors (for instance, ghettoes) and discrimination 
measures and to the desire of Jewish conservative circles 
for self-isolation arising from conceptions of the “exclusi- 
veness” of the Jewish people believed to be “God-chosen.”’ 
It is this conservative tendency that lies at the basis of 
the Zionist “solution” to the Jewish question. 

The natural, voluntary assimilation of Jews on the ba- 
sis of civic emancipation has proved to be a historically 
progressive process. And it is the more progressive, the 
more profound are the bourgeois-democratic changes tak- 
ing place in the given country. All truly progressive lead- 
ers, Jewish and non-Jewish, have supported such a solu- 
tion of the Jewish question. Marx championed it. Lenin 
wrote “that is precisely what the Jewish problem amounts 
to: assimilation or isolation?” 

Afraid of losing its position of domination over “its 
own” workingmen, the bourgeoisie of tsarist Russia incited 
nationalist sentiments and tried in every way to isolate 
“their own” working masses from the general proletarian, 
international struggle. The Jewish bourgeoisie, too, whip- 
ped up nationalist feelings, opposed international solidarity 
of the working folk with bellicose bourgeois nationalism, 
stupefying, fooling and disuniting the workers in order to 
make them toe the line of the bourgeoisie, as Lenin pointed 
out. 

Zionism made use of two myths which Judaism assidu- 
ously cultivated in the minds of the working people, of the 
disinherited: one is about the Jews being the “chosen” peo- 
ple, and the other is about the “coming of the Messiah.” 
These myths, which brought “consolation” to the masses 
suffering from hardships and torment that fell to their lot, 
enabled the clergy of any religion in a class society to carry 
out their function: to suppress activities, stifle discontent, 
distract the people from the struggle to change their posi- 
tion, and to make them submissive. 

The Zionist leaders used this tested method for the same 


84 


purpose— to make the masses submit to their absolute rule 
and to force them to support the scheme of setting up, with 
the help of one European power or a group of European 
powers, a Jewish state in Palestine. To make certain that 
this support will be active and strong, Zionism advanced 
yet another thesis about anti-Semitism being “eternal” and 
inherent in all nations, which can only be overcome by the 
resettlement of the Jews from places of their “dispersion” 
in a state of their own. 

The myth about the Jews being the “chosen” people 
was, on the one hand, an assertion of the ‘‘exclusiveness”’ 
of the Jews as distinguished from all other peoples, a nega- 
tion of class contradictions within this people; on the other 
hand, it meant regarding other peoples as “inferior” peo- 
ples belonging to a “lower” race, the cultivation of an at- 
titude of ill-will towards those who, supposedly, were anti- 
Semites. 

This thesis is politically harmful and immoral, because 
it compels the exploited to subordinate himself to the ex- 
ploiter who is his fellow man. It is directed against proleta- 
rian solidarity and international cooperation of all working 
people, and, like other kinds of national-chauvinism, fosters 
the immoral attitude of “what I don’t want to be done unto 
me, I can do unto others.” 

The idea of setting up, with the aid of European powers, 
a Jewish state in Palestine distracted the Jewish working 
people from the international revolutionary struggle in the 
countries where they lived. 

Although outwardly Zionism and anti-Semitism are op- 
posite to each other—judeophilia and judeophobia—they 
have much in common. Zionism deliberately inflames anti- 
Semitism, while anti-Semitism stirs up Zionism. The class 
approach to the Jewish question is substituted by both Zio- 
nism and anti-Semitism by a racialist approach. Both con- 
sider the Jews an exclusive people: according to the Zionists 
the Jews are a “superior” people, a “chosen” people; the 
anti-Semites, on the other hand, attribute negative qualities 
to the Jewish people. Both favour the resettlement of Jews 
from the countries where they are living. And both express 
national-chauvinist ideology and psychology: the anti-Se- 
mites are ready to declare all Jews Zionists, while the Zio- 
nists are ready to proclaim all Gentiles anti-Semites. 

Anti-Semitism is a historical phenomenon, and, there- 


85 


fore, a transient phenomenon. It was not the resettlement of 
the Jews but (prior to the socialist revolution) the democra- 
tization of society that helped to discredit and overcome 
anti-Semitism. In a socialist society, anti-Semitism has been 
completely uprooted, and the conditions for its existence 
have been liquidated. 

Among the leaders of Zionism there were both outright 
racialists (for instance, Zhabotinsky), who “anticipated” 
the much later ideology of corporative fascism and “inven- 
tors” of eclectic petty-bourgeois systems, who considered 
themselves “progressive.” However, the essence of Zionism 
and its ideological principles have remained the same since 
the very start and accord with the interests of the bourgeoi- 
sie and not of the people. The opposition of the Zionists to 
the revolutionary struggle of the masses against tsarism, 
and, after the Great October Socialist Revolution, to the 
upbuilding of a socialist society showed that Zionism is a 
reactionary, anti-popular, bourgeois-nationalist ideology. 

The evolution of Zionist ideology was determined by 
the social and political changes resulting from the general 
laws of development of imperialism in the 20th century and 
the general crisis of capitalism. The most predatory and 
prosperous section of the Jewish bourgeoisie became a big 
monopoly bourgeoisie linked by close bonds with interna- 
tional monopoly capital. Zionism was a real blessing to cer- 
tain circles of the imperialist bourgeoisie, particularly those 
in the USA and the FRG, in their pursuit of an aggressive 
neo-colonialist policy. 

Through international Zionist organizations the Jewish 
monopoly bourgeoisie incites anti-Sovietism and tries to 
mislead politically immature and gullible people with its 
venomous, slanderous propaganda. The source of this anti- 
Sovietism lies, of course, in class hatred towards the world’s 
first socialist state, which abolished capitalism, and in the 
fact that the Soviet Union has historically proved that the 
Jewish question can only be solved on the basis of the vic- 
tory of socialism. 

The victory of the October Revolution and the build- 
ing of socialism in the Soviet Union completely confirmed 
the correctness of the Leninist stand on the Jewish ques- 
tion. The revolution completely abolished every manifesta- 
tion of national oppression and anti-Semitism; the Soviet 
Constitution states that all national discrimination violates 


8 


socialist law and is punishable as a crime. The social, moral 
and political position of the Jewish population has radically 
changed. An end has been put for all times to poverty and 
pauperism, from which the broad masses had suffered. A 
Jewish Autonomous Region has been established. As histo- 
rical experience has shown, the overwhelming majority of 
the Jewish population in the USSR have chosen to work 
and live among the other Soviet peoples. Naturally, in these 
circumstances a process of assimilation of large numbers 
of Jewish people takes place. Mixed marriages, the adop- 
tion of Russian, Ukrainian, Byelorussian, Georgian or other 
languages as their own and the overcoming of religious and 
nationalist prejudices explain the fact that this process is 
taking place absolutely voluntarily in socialist conditions. 


As Marx and Lenin predicted, this process was a healthy 
one; it helped to draw the working people of Jewish natio- 
nality, as all the peoples emancipated by the socialist revo- 
lution, into active participation in all spheres of production, 
social life, culture and science, art and literature. There is 
no need to mention names here in order to show that this 
process has been a healthy one; they are widely known. It 
is precisely in the Soviet Union that the Jews have ac- 
quired a real motherland. 


What, therefore, can Zionist propaganda offer in face of 
these historical results except slander? For these results 
show the entire historical groundlessness of the main prin- 
ciples of Zionist ideology: the Zionists’ claim to be the only 
representatives of the Jewish people, and the anti-historical 
notion of “world Judaism” which has long ago been expos- 
ed by Lenin and now pursues one aim—to bind the Jewish 
working masses to the reactionary imperialist circles by false 
nationalistic ideas. 


The class essence of present-day Zionism is clearly re- 
vealed in the policy of aggression against the Arab states 
conducted by the Zionist leaders of Israel. All the manifes- 
tations which had in the past exposed Zionism as a reactio- 
nary bourgeois nationalist ideology have today become more 
pronounced. 

The rulers of Israel, their extremist groups which repre- 
sent the interests of the Jewish monopoly bourgeoisie, are 
imposing on the people of Israel an adventurist policy bas- 
ed on “positions of strength,” a policy clothed in peace- 


87 


avowing phrases. But these “positions” rest on artificial, 
transient factors that appeared during the Israeli-Arab con- 
flict. We say “artificial” because war is part of the policy, 
and the policy of the Israeli rulers had been determined 
long before the rise of the Israeli state by the chauvinistic 
attitude of the Zionists towards other peoples, by the neces- 
sity of protecting imperialist powers and the principle of 
“TI can do what others may not.” 

In some ways the racist ideas of the Zionists resemble the 
racial “theory” of the nazis. Recently the Knesset (parlia- 
ment) adopted a law according to which the Jewish natio- 
nality of a person will be determined on the basis of racial 
features and acceptance of orthodox Judaism. 


Even before the recent conflict broke out the Zionist 
leaders had been pursuing a policy which tended to create 
national discord. The aggressive measures carried out 
by the present extremist leaders of Israel are in full con- 
formity with these ideological principles. They explain and 
bear out the fact that present-day Zionism is a reactionary 
and pro-imperialist ideology. 

Large segments of the Israeli population, influenced by 
nationalist hysteria, are still following this suicidal policy 
imposed on them by the ruling quarters. However, sooner 
or later, the working people of the Israel will understand 
the criminal and disastrous character of this policy. 


The progressive forces of Israel are being led by the 
Communist Party which is showing practical ways of pea- 
ceful development of the state: “not with imperialism 
against the Arab peoples but with the Arab peoples against 
imperialism’. The internationalist position of the Commu- 
nist Party of Israel will triumph despite all difficulties and 
repressions. 

The June 1969 International Conference of Communist 
and Workers’ Parties, which raised still higher the banner 
of proletarian internationalism, declared in its Main Docu- 
ment: 


“We call for the broadest possible protest movement 
against the most ignominious phenomenon of our time, the 
barbarous persecution of the 25 million Negroes in the USA, 
the racialist terror in South Africa and Rhodesia, the perse- 
cution of the Arab population in occupied territory and in 
Israel, against racial and national discrimination, against 


88 


Zionism, and anti-Semitism, all of which are fanned by 
reactionary capitalist forces and which they use to mislead 
the masses politically.” 


Professor I. BRAGINSKY, editor-in-chief, magazine 


Narody Aziii Afriki 
Pravda, March 17, 1970 


The Poison of Zionism 


People of good will in every part of the world are fol- 
lowing with growing anxiety and indignation the dangerous 
course of events in the Middle East. The Zionist ruling clique 
of Israel have turned that area into one of the worst trouble 
spots on the globe. 

Trying to secure an ideological screen for its adventurist 
policy the Zionist propaganda machine is stepping up the 
mass-scale conditioning of world public opinion. In doing so 
it resorts to the most brazen distortion of the truth, and at- 
tempts to brainwash Soviet citizens of Jewish descent. Befo- 
re we demonstrate the futility of such attempts it is necessary 
to briefly review the main aspects of the Zionist “creed.” 

Zionism, defined by Lenin as an ideology “completely 
false and reactionary in its very essence,’ today appears as a 
sum total of ideologies and organizations of the Jewish big 
bourgeoisie closely connected with the imperialist circles of 
the USA, Britain, West Germany, the South African Re- 
public and other countries of the capitalist world. Rabid anti- 
communism and racism of the worst kind are the principal 
distinguishing features of the instigatory, deceptive “works” 
by Zionist “theorists.” One Zionist appeal says: “We can be 
proud of qualities that no other nation of the world posses- 
ses in such a measure.” If that is not racism, what is it? 

But perhaps modern Zionists consider statements like that 
outdated? Here we should like to recall, for the benefit of 
Israel’s Prime Minister Golda Meir, how scandalized the 
“good society” of Israel was when her daughter decided to 
marry a Yemeni Jew. For even Israelites have different rat- 
ings in Zionist books. The “high quality mark” is given to 


89 


the so-called sabras—people born in Palestine: “‘second-gra- 
de” Israelites are the ashkenazis, people who came from the 
countries of Eastern and Central Europe; the lowest, “infe- 
rior” category are the sefards—Jews who came to Israel 
from the countries of the Mediterranean basin and the Mid- 
dle East, and who constitute the majority of the population 
in Israel. 

If we trace the Zionists’ connections with the most nefa- 
rious forces of our time we shall see that Zionists constitute 
one of world reaction’s shock units. Indicative in this regard 
is the understanding reached long before World War II bet- 
ween Zionist leaders and fascist rulers in a number of Euro- 
pean countries. Consider for instance the notorious, diabolical 
deal Kastner, leader of the Hungarian Zionists, made with 
the nazi fanatic, Eichmann, whereby hundreds of thousands 
of Hungarian Jews were sacrificed to save a handful of rich 
Jews. 

M. Benvenisti, former head of the Rumanian Zionist or- 
ganization, minced no words when he wrote in 1944: “Ruma- 
nian Governments, even the most anti-Semitic—including 
Marshal Antonescu’s government—approved the activity of 
Zionist organizations.” There is nothing like being frank. 

We admit that the Zionists and anti-Semites of a fascist 
hue were not exactly in love with one another. However, the 
decisive factor was the irreversible logic of the class strug- 
gle—not someone’s subjective sentiments: since anti-commun- 
ism and anti-Sovietism are the core of both fascist and Zion- 
ist ideologies, and since the fascist ringleaders regarded 
Zionism as a reliable tool for splitting the working-class mo- 
vement according to the national principle, their objectively 
identical class interests led the Zionists and the fascists to 
unite and cooperate. 

There is complete accord in relations between Zionism 
and US imperialism, the leading force of world reaction to- 
day. And again it is the unity of class aims that underlies 
the sinister collusion of Zionist leaders and the US ruling 
circles and monopolies. 

The world Zionist organization and the Zionist clan that 
rules Israel appear in our time as hard-working contractors 
of the oil empires across the ocean which help arm to the 
teeth Moshe Dayan’s thugs and turn his aggressive hordes 
into an armoured force appointed and encouraged by Wa- 
shington to crush progressive regimes in a number of Arab 


90 


countries. In less than 20 years the stream of gold in the 
form of grants and credits pouring into the safes of Israeli 
extremists amounted to nearly 9,000 million dollars. 

One of Zionism’s strategic tasks is to tone down the class 
struggle within the Jewry of the capitalist countries and re- 
place it with struggle for “national aims.” And these aims, 
as viewed by Jewish bourgeois nationalism, consist in rally- 
ing round Zion (the mountain near Jerusalem) all Jews scat- 
tered about the world who, in Zionist notions, constitute a 
“single world Jewry.” One need not be very shrewd to rea- 
lize what consequences may result from that fallacious slo- 
gan of the Zionist program. It is obvious that there is no 
place within its present legal frontiers, specified by the UNO 
in 1947, for Israel to accommodate the 16 million Jews liv- 
ing outside Israel. It follows that even partial implementa- 
tion of the slogan would involve territorial expansion, for- 
cible acquisition of alien lands. 

International piracy and violation of basic laws has long 
become the main line of the foreign policy pursued by the 
Israeli “hawks.” 


The following historical allusion is in place here. In the 
Middle Ages the crusaders justified their plunderous inroads 
to the East by their would-be divine mission “to recover the 
Sepulchre of Christ.” Today the Zionists explain to the world 
that the “liberation” of the Jordanian part of Jerusalem was 
prompted by the righteous desire to give to Judaist believers 
access to another “sacred object”—“the wailing wall.” It is 
worthy of note that when the United Nations debated the re- 
solution denouncing Israel’s capture of Old Jerusalem, the 
‘sanctimonious actions” of the Zionist aggressors were un- 
derstood and supported by only two states, Portugal and the 
South African Republic. No comment is needed here, we be- 
lieve. Besides Biblical arguments, however, there are also 
secular contentions in the supply of overworked propaganda 
stunts which the peddlers of Zionist ideology. offer retail and 
wholesale. The favourite merchandise is reference to the 
“historical right” of the Jewish people to possess their “an- 
cestral” lands. However, in international law, just as in civil 
or criminal law, there is such a notion as prescription. [ma- 
gine the earthshaking catastrophies that could ensue if the 
peoples demanded a return to the status quo of 2,000, nay 
200 years ago. The United States, for instance, would revert 
to the British Crown, for in the 18th century the present US 


91 


territory was still a British colony. 

Palestine was no desert when the Zionist colonizers 
began eyeing it avidly—it has been populated by Arabs for 
the last 13 centuries. This fact could be overlooked only by 
shortsighted political adventurers. 

Groundless speculations on “ancestral lands” are made 
the “theoretical substantiation” for instigatory appeals by 
Golda Meir to Soviet Jews whom she coaxes with nauseating 
persistence to “return” to Israel. Get this straight, Zionist 
gentlemen: Soviet Jews have only one homeland—the great 
Soviet Union, and we are not going to abandon it like an 
apple you have bit into or like an old pair of gloves. Our 
sons shall never handle the control sticks of your “Phan- 
toms” or the steering wheels of your bulldozers which raze 
peaceful Arab villages to the ground; they shall never sow 
death among the innocent population of the Arab countries. 
We wish no part of your black deeds which would have 
been no mean addition to the service records of dyed-in-the- 
wool fascist killers. Look for simpletons who will swallow 
your poisonous propaganda some place else! 

And another thing: Who gave the Meirs and Dayans the 
right to claim “spiritual guidance” of Soviet Jews when 
they do not even have the right to speak on behalf of all 
Israelites? For they represent only the extremist “elite” and 
those citizens of Israel whom they have so far succeeded in 
fooling with their “philosophy.” Zionism is the heart and 
soul of the darkest reaction and militant imperialism. The- 
refore, it remains the sworn enemy of all workers, regard- 
less of their nationality or domicile. 

While the Soviet people, including Jewish citizens, are 
unanimous in denouncing the irresponsible Zionist clique, 
the Israeli radio has recently come up with another provo- 
cation, claiming that Soviet Jews are compelled to take part 
in the “anti-Israeli, anti-Semitic campaign.” We shall note 
first that the Zionist propaganda machine has always based 
its hypocritical inventions on a deliberate, premeditated con- 
fusion of notions. “No, gentlemen, it is not Israel that the 
Soviet Union opposes,” stated the head of the Soviet Go- 
vernment, A. N. Kosygin, speaking on June 19, 1967, from 
the rostrum of the UN General Assembly, “but the aggres- 
sive policy of that country’s ruling circles.” 

Contrary to what the apologists of Zionism are trying to 
prove, anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism are not identical no- 


92 


tions. People who oppose Zionism (and it is opposed by all 
progressives in the world) are at the same time fighting all 
kinds of national discord, including anti-Semitism. Zionists, 
however, are interested in artificially inflating anti-Semi- 
tism, for national discord nurtures Zionism. This was blun- 
tly stated, in writing, by none other than the patriarch of 
Zionism, D. Ben-Gurion. 

We cannot keep silent—our conscience does not let us, 
our conscience of staunch, dedicated internationalists educat- 
ed in the lofty principles of the Leninist national policy. It 
is our conscience that prompts us to condemn Zionist gangs- 
ters and their cave-man views. To us racism is equally ab- 
horrent, whether it flourishes in Alabama, in Rhodesia, or 
in the ‘Holy Land.” 


M. GOLDENBERG, postgraduate, Moldavian 
Academy of Sciences 


Selskaya Zhizn, March 17, 1970. 


Zionism Without Masks 


Smoke still covered over the ruins of Abu Zaabal after 
the raid of the Israeli air force when Mr. Pinkus, President 
of the Jewish Agency and one of the world Zionist leaders, 
cynically appealed to the Tel Aviv authorities to go on act- 
ing “as wisely and boldly” as before. “These two qualities,” 
he declared, “spring from the conviction that the Zionist 
cause is a just cause and that the existence of Israel is a 
guarantee of the preservation of the Jews.” 

Mr. Pinkus who is a personal friend of Mrs. Golda Meir, 
Prime Minister of Israel, and fully shares her views repeat- 
ed almost verbatim the theses underlying the Zionist ideolo- 
gy first pronounced by the “father of Zionism,” Theodore 
Herzl, at the end of the last century. These concern the 
“racial exclusiveness and superiority of the Jews” and their 
“biblical motherland” which is the “guarantee of the preser- 
vation of the Jewish nation.” 


93 


Ideological Heirs of Theodore Herz] 


1895—this was the time when colonialism flourished and 
the class awareness of the proletariat awakened. It was a 
time when imperialism, on the one hand, enjoyed unlimited 
power over the working people both in the metropolises and 
the colonies and, on the other hand, sought means of consoli- 
dating and preserving that power in the face of the mount- 
ing revolutionary movement of the proletariat and national- 
liberation struggle in the colonies. 

It found one of such means in a booklet written by 
Theodore Herzl, an Austrian journalist, entitled the State of 
Jews. 

What was so fascinating about this booklet? Surely not 
the religious ravings of Herzl about the “racial and cultural 
superiority” of Jews to other people, though the Rothschilds 
were undoubtedly pleased to learn that they were “exclu- 
sive.’ Much more valuable was the practical advice contai- 
ned in the booklet on how to fight the proletariat in various 
European countries and maintain the colonial domination of 
the imperialist powers. 

Herzl in effect asserted that the working Jews and the 
Rothschilds had the same interests, those of “true Jewry.” 
In his view the interests of the Jewish working people were 
radically different from those of the toiling men of other 
nations. It followed that the oppressed Jews, no matter 
where they lived, should keep apart from workers’ and libe- 
ration movements. Moreover, Herzl held that even Jews 
from the exploited class should oppose the “weak and op- 
pressed,” since only the “strong and powerful” were able to 
help build the “Jewish state.” 

Such treacherous “logic,” however, was not the only 
attraction for the “high and mighty.” Herzl’s call for the 
creation of a “Zionist state at Mount Zion” tempted the 
imperialists for another reason. “For Europe,” Herzl wrote, 
“we will create in Palestine an outpost against Asia; we 
will be the outpost of the civilized world against barba- 
rity.” 

Thus we can see that Zionism was from its very incep- 
tion opposed to the working-class movement and the natio- 
nal-liberation struggle and that it was this feature that made 
it so attractive to the imperialists. 


94 


Since the publication of Herzl’s book the Zionist move- 
ment has grown in scope. Like a chameleon it adjusted itself 
to situations in various countries, to different regimes and 
politicians. When the state of Israel was set up in 1948, 
Zionists penetrated the ruling circles in Tel Aviv, seizing 
key government posts. Eventually Zionism found its princi- 
pal and natural patron in the United States, the chief bul- 
wark of imperialism. 

Modern Zionism is the ideology, the political practice, 
a whole network of organizations of the big Jewish bour- 
geoisie which has associated itself with the monopoly circles 
in the USA and other imperialist powers. 


A Sinister Consortium 


The influential Paris newspaper La Nation recently 
made an interesting observation. “At times one gets the im- 
pression’, it says, “that the state of Israel has in all Western 
countries where there are large Jewish communities uncon- 
ditional allies ready to bring pressure to bear on the go- 
vernment of their country, to make it support Israeli poli- 
tics in all cases, and denounce any government not yielding 
to this pressure.” 

There is much truth in this observation. One should not 
forget, however, that the “unconditional allies” referred to 
by La Nation do not represent Jewish communities as a 
whole but all kinds of open and secret Zionist organizations. 
In the 70 years that have elapsed since the first Zionist con- 
gress was held in Basle the Zionist movement has branched 
out into dozens of organizations which often have no out- 
ward resemblance to one another. The reason for this is not 
so much the internal wrangling of Zionist apostles as the 
increasing need to cover up their common basic goal, the 
attempt to split the workers’ movement in the capitalist 
countries, the desire to give every help to the imperialist 
power: in their colonial robbery, to create a “great 
Israel.” 

World Zionism has no one single organizational centre, 
though its leadership has been claimed by the World Zionist 


95 


Organization with branches in 60 countries, the World 
Jewish Congress which has 67 national chapters, and other 
organizations which usually stress their universal character 
by including the word “world” in their name. It would be 
incorrect to identify world Zionism with the state of Israel, 
one reason being that Israel, like any other capitalist state, 
has its exploiter and exploited classes, the oppressors and 
the oppressed. But here are other reasons as well. 

For example, the executive body of the World Zionist 
Organization, the Jewish Agency, has offices both in Jeru- 
salem and New York; its president spends six months in 
Israel and the other six in the United States. Many impor- 
tant conferences of Zionist leaders are held in the USA. A 
meeting of US Zionists which took place late last January 
was greeted by President Nixon. A conference of two thou- 
sand top Zionists who gathered in Miami Beach, Florida, 
less than a month later received messages of greetings from 
Mrs. Golda Meir and Mayor Lindsay of New York. 

One might say that there exists today an American- 
Israeli Zionist consortium. Zionist organizations in the USA 
possess immense wealth, they have close ties with the Admi- 
nistration, the Congress and various financial and industrial 
circles. They hold a strong position in the US press, radio 
and television. 


US support for the aggressive policy of Israel in the 
Middle East is due not only to Zionism’s great influence 
across the Atlantic but also to the fact that US imperialism 
has a direct interest in maintaining its economic and strate- 
gic positions in that area. Each year the US monopolies rake 
in some two and a half thousand million dollars from the 
Middle Eastern countries. Now that such fabulous profits 
are being endangered by the national-liberation struggle of 
the Arab people, the US oil tycoons such as David Rocke- 
feller, Robert Anderson, and John McCloy regard Israel as 
their sheet anchor. The situation has been well described by 
the New York Daily Column which said, echoing Herzl’s 
ideas, that should the United States lose Israel it would have 
nothing to lean upon from Gibraltar to Cairo as well as 
further South and East, as far as the Indian Ocean. 

Thus it is clear that the interests of the Israeli Zionist 
leaders striving to carry out the expansionist idea of a 
“Great Israel” at the expense of the Arab peoples coincide 
with the interests of the US monopolists and militarists. 


Under the Black Flag of Anti-Communism 


Anti-communism is another feature of Zionism which, 
like the magic word “sesame” opens the armour-plated safes 
of monopoly capitalists in the United States, Federal Ger- 
many and Britain. 

In the early years of the 20th century, shortly after the 
first Zionist congress was held in Basle, Lenin exposed Zion- 
ism as a reactionary and irrational doctrine which only 
benefits the Jewish big bourgeoisie and world imperialism. 
Thus Marxism-Leninism, which is essentially an internatio- 
nalist teaching, became “enemy No. 1” for the Zionists. Zio- 
nists have been bitter opponents of Soviet power from the 
very beginning. 

A few months after the victory of the October Revolu- 
tion Zionists held a secret meeting in Moscow at which 
they declared: “Socialism bars the road to Zionism. Zionism 
and socialism are not only mutually opposed to each other; 
they exclude each other.” 

The Zionists acted against Soviet power in full conformi- 
ty with this programmatic thesis during the Civil War, dur- 
ing the course of collectivization and industrialization and 
in the Great Patriotic War against fascism. Zionists who 
cried from rooftops about the “protection of Jews” were in 
cahoots with sworn anti-Semites when the latter attacked 
the Soviet Union and the international communist move- 
ment. 

The Zionists regarded the nascent nazism as their ally 
against the world’s first socialist state. While the nazis were 
murdering thousands of Jews in gas chambers and burning 
them in ovens in concentration camps the Zionists maintai- 
ned business contacts with the nazi leader Eichmann whose 
views were later described by the Israeli journalist Hannah 
Arendt: “Eichmann despised assimilated Jews, orthodox 
Jews irritated him, Zionists he loved. ..”. 

The entire postwar history of Zionism testifies to comple- 
te understanding between the Zionist leaders and the impe- 
rialist circles in the USA, West Germany and Great Britain, 
when they took joint action against the Soviet Union, the 
international communist movement and the national-libera- 
tion movement. 

The Zionist-inspired notion of “dual citizenship” and 


4—474 97 


“dual patriotism” of Jews living in various countries has 
been used by imperialist circles to undermine the socialist 
community of nations. 

The Israeli rulers are now waging another vicious anti- 
Soviet campaign under the much-worn flag of “protection of 
the Jews.” We would like to discuss this campaign in some 
detail. 


Two Sides of the Medal 


When Mrs. Golda Meir and her friends began talking 
about “protection of their Jewish brothers” from the social- 
ist countries, particularly from the Soviet Union, one may 
safely bet that their move would be followed by another 
campaign in the West against “Soviet anti-Semitism.” 

The fact is that anti-Semitism has been from the very 
beginning the hobby-horse and support of the Zionist move- 
ment. Herzl stated frankly that he regarded anti-Semitism 
“a movement useful for the development of the Jewish per- 
sonality.” Ben Gurion, the modern follower of Herzl, said 
that “if he had the power” he would “pick out young people 
devoted to the cause of Zionism,” “‘order them to be disgui- 
sed as non-Jews and persecute Jews with crude anti-Semite 
methods.” 

Why would Ben Gurion want to do this? He answered 
this question himself: “The results of emigration to Israel 
would be ten thousandfold greater than those obtained by 
our emissaries who have been for decades pouring their ser- 
mons on deaf ears.” 

One should not be surprised in the light of these “theo- 
retical revelations,” that Mrs. Golda Meir makes use of alle- 
ged anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union and pleads with the 
“Jewish brothers” to return to the “promised land.” This 1s 
quite natural since modern Zionism is a special variety and 
even a branch of anti-Semitism. Zionism and anti-Semitism 
are two sides of the same medal; they both serve the impe- 
rialist aims of isolating nations and putting them against 
one another. 

The aims of Zionism and anti-Semitism coincide. Zio- 
nists attempt to prove that Jews, wherever they live, should 
be regarded as a special nation, “gathered together” from 


98 


various countries and settled on a territory of their own. 
Rabid reactionaries and nazis who preach anti-Semitism 
also want Jews to be considered “alien elements” in the co- 
untry where they live, who should be driven out of the co- 
untry or otherwise “removed.” 

Thus Zionism and nazism have practically the same 
aims. That is why working Jews are indignant each time the 
present Zionist rulers of Israel, aided by the entire reac- 
tionary press in the West, come out against “anti-Semitism 
in socialist countries.” 

The disgraceful Zionist campaign has been resolutely de- 
nounced by a group of Jewish citizens of the USSR at a re- 
cent press conference in Moscow, it has been condemned in 
hundreds of letters published in the Soviet press. “We So- 
viet patriots and internationalists,” says the statement read 
at the press conference, “reject the laughable claims by the 
Israeli rulers and their Zionist adherents in other coun- 
tries of the right to speak on behalf of all Jews. Working 
Jews, like progressive people of all other nationalities, have 
nothing in common with the Zionist racists.” 

Israel lives in a state of religious fanaticism, moral terror 
and racial intolerance with regard to the Arab peoples and 
all people who do not accept Zionist views. Even Western 
publicists who have visited the ‘promised land” write about 
the “noxious odour of racist intolerance’ emanating from 
the “Zionist claims of exclusiveness and the supreme right 
to decide and judge.” And yet the Tel Aviv rulers who 
have stained their hands with the blood of their neighbour- 
ing people dare to talk about “protecting their Jewish bro- 
thers” the world over! 


One must not underestimate the danger of this charac- 
teristic tactic of Zionism: any action against the Zionist mo- 
vement, against the Zionist leaders in Israel and other coun- 
tries is invariably dubbed “anti-Semitism.” As the French 
writer Andre Wurmser has said “anyone who does not ap- 
plaud the Israeli aggression against the Arabs is considered 
an anti-Semite.” 


4* 99 


World Zionism serves imperialist reaction and the forces 
of anti-communism. It must be unmasked. 


A. KUROV 


Moskovskaya Pravda, 
March 26, 1970. 


The “Great Israel’ Bluff 
“The Third Jewish Kingdom” 


Quite a few “scientific” historical, political and other 
Zionist works have been published recently expounding the 
idea of Israel as ‘the third Jewish Kingdom”, a concept that 
is popular in Israel today. 

. .The new Israel is the third state born in the history 
of the Jewish people,’ A. Galin, an Israeli scholar, writes 
in his book Israel, the Jewish State: ““What were the first 
two ‘kingdoms’? The Biblical kingdom of David and Solo- 
mon and the state of the Maccabees...” 


Why have Zionists started to engage in recollections of 
“hoary antiquity” and in dreams of the “greatness” of 
ancient Israel? The answer is perfectly clear. Insistence on 
Israel’s right to “succeed” to the ancient Jewish kingdoms 
has to justify the territorial claims of the Zionists who de- 
mand the creation of a “great Israel from the Nile to the 
Euphrates,” has to gloss over the ambitions to annex foreign 
territories inherent in the very concept of Zionism. 


It was Theodore Herzl, the founder of Zionism, who de- 
manded “sole sovereignty” over a definite geographical ter- 
ritory and proclaimed Palestine the “historical homeland” of 
the Jews. 

Back in 1948 the first political act of the Zionist bour- 
geoisie, on coming to power, the “Declaration”, proclaimed 
the “country of Israel” the historical homeland of the Jewish 
people. That was the first challenge to the United Nations 
which granted the right to state self-determination both to 
the Arabs and the Jews living in Palestine. 

The Zionist concept of a “historical homeland” and, con- 


100 


sequently, of a Palestine “free of Arabs” led to the first 
Arab-Israeli war which ended in disaster for more than 
900,000 Palestinian Arabs driven from their lands by the 
“conquerors.” The analogous concept of a “Germany free 
of Jews” took a toll of millions of lives. Evidently, the new- 
styled racialists have too short a memory. 


During the last two decades the rulers of Israel did 
everything to strengthen their close alliance with imperial- 
ism, sought to turn the country into a major arsenal, bridge- 
head and strong bastion of the West in the Arab East where 
colonialism was losing one position after another. The impe- 
rialists were not stingy: they invested more than 9,000 mil- 
lion dollars in Israel’s militarized economy. 


The rulers of Israel not only constantly spoke about “Le- 
bensraum,” but also tried to act accordingly, insolently ig- 
noring the decisions of the United Nations. They did not 
permit Palestinian Arabs to return to their homeland. This, 
in effect, was a constant challenge to the Arabs, an artfully 
provoked “‘casus belli.” For the Israeli Zionists the Palesti- 
nian Arabs did not exist. 


The strategists of Zionism day after day conducted an 
artful propaganda campaign designed ultimately to justify 
the seizure of Arab territories. Thus, in a beautifully desig- 
ned official government booklet Jsrael in Figures. 1963 it 
was stressed in the very first pages that the state of Israel 
was taking up a part of the historical territory of the coun- 
try of Israel. In ancient times Israeli tribes possessed a ter- 
ritory of 44,000 square kilometres. Thus, for the naive the 
idea was expounded of peace with the Arabs, of the present 
frontiers being acceptable to both sides. But actually such 
propaganda tricks were preparing the ground for creating 
the “myth” of the quarrelsome nature of the Arabs, their 
aggressiveness. A prolonged, hardly noticeable conditioning 
of public opinion was carried on. And when the hour struck 
a perfidious, blitzkrieg-type aggression was launched aga- 
inst the Arab countries. 


The “victories” of Israel in the war against the Arab 
people were enthusiastically acclaimed by international 
Zionism which invariably supports the Israeli extremists in 
every way. What motivates this international bulwark of 
reaction which glorifies aggression? What are the Zionist 
organizations like? 


101 


The Zionist Octopus and Its Tentacles 


The Zionist movement is a ramified and scattered net- 
work of Zionist and Jewish organizations in different coun- 
tries. In the United States alone there are about 700 of them. 
Throughout the world 1,036 Zionist periodicals are publi- 
shed. 

The Zionist organizations are tentacles of a tremendous 
octopus, the World Zionist Organization. Huge sums of “vo- 
luntary donations” flow into Israel along a capillary system. 
Through it close ties are maintained between the Govern- 
ment of Israel and influential reactionary circles of the 
United States and other capitalist countries. In this way, 
international reactionary forces carry on their foul activi- 
ie against the socialist countries and all the progressive 
orces. 

Developing the propaganda thesis of Israel as the home- 
land of “world Jewry,” the Zionists are concretely putting 
forward programmatic aims and tasks, the most important 
being to promote the material and spiritual consolidation of 
Israel and its prosperity because Israel is the “centre of 
world Jewry,” its “guiding beacon and pride.” The Zionists 
appeal to the national sentiments of Jews, proclaiming re- 
turn to the homeland of the “expelled” people to be “vitally 
important” or, to put it more simply, calling for the mass 
immigration of Jews to Israel. They count particularly on 
the Western youth, the most unstable and unsettled stratum 
of society. Calling for an offensive against the “diaspora,” * 
the Zionists insist on intensifying “Jewish self-conscious- 
ness’ among the Jewish masses, on preserving “‘special’”’ Je- 
wish groups. In other words, they are propagating the old 
racialist idea of the “world Jewry”, who are “special” not 
only in anthropological respects, but also by virtue of the 
“historic mission’’ entrusted to them. 

What will such a call for “self-isolation” of Jewish com- 
munities lead to? Only to the revival of medieval ghettos, 
the horrible breeding grounds of anti-Semitism. But this 
plays into the hands of the Zionists because, in their opi- 
nion, anti-Semitism stimulates the Zionist movement. Any 
outbreak of anti-Semitism helps swell the nationalist ranks. 

The Zionists are raising a hue and cry about the tenden- 


* The body of Jews living outside of Israel. 
102 


cy towards the assimilation of Jews that is evident in all 
countries. Thus, the number of mixed marriages in some 
US cities is as high as 40 per cent and in Australia, 70 per 
cent. The Zionists regard assimilation of the Jews worse 
disaster than Jewish pogroms in the past because, as they 
put it, this endangers the “very existence’ of the Jewish 
people. 

The international system of Zionism which provides 
Israeli ruling circles with direct financial support is by no 
means a philanthropic organization. Those who do not con- 
tribute money to Zionist organizations are publicly declared 
apostates. Donations of various kinds are a constant source 
for financing Israel’s expansionist policy. In the long run, 
every Jew who donates money, wittingly or unwittingly, 
becomes an accomplice in the aggressive plans of the Tel 
Aviv ruling circles, a supporter of the “great Israel” policy. 

Zionist activities affect the sphere of international law. 
They demand “dual loyalty” of the Jews and now “dual 
citizenship” also. What is more, Israel is to come first and 
then the country where they live. This is demanded of Jews 
regardless of whether the government of the country where 
they live approves of it or not. 

Moreover, the Zionists demand international recognition 
of the status of a “single Jewish people” who are obliged to 
obey the “land of Zion” and the two centres where the lead- 
ing agencies of the World Zionist Organization are located, 
Israeli-occupied Jerusalem and New York. They call for 
recognition of Israel’s special “international mission” (be- 
cause it is an “exceptional phenomenon’, and does not 
“resemble other states”) and also the special status of its 
diplomatic missions abroad for the purpose of maintaining 
constant, free and the broadest contact with Jews. They 
speak of the “direct duty” of Jews and the entire Zionist 
movement to create a so-called “Security Front of Israel,” 
like the vaunted “Peace Corps.” The activities of the brazen 
Zionists and their movement are beginning to assume forms 
and a scale threatening the sovereignty of other states. 


Demanding “‘self-isolation” of Jews, they want to con- 
vert the Jewish communities, with the support of imperia- 
lism, into their well-secured hinterland, into “fifth columns” 
scattered throughout the world, which must conduct energe- 
tic subversive work against the Soviet Union and other so- 
cialist countries. The Zionists demand the “legitimate” right 


103 


to intervene in the internal affairs of socialist countries, are 
calling for the conversion of Israel into a “superstate” for 
which the concepts of independence and sovereignty in the 
ordinary meaning of these words are alien. 

Is it not too much, gentlemen? Is it not high time to call 
a spade a spade and to discard the veil of nostalgia for 
former grandeur? You have paraded long enough in the 
garb of defenders of the interests of the Jewish nation. It is 
sufficient for a Jew not to participate in your movement, 
and not to support it to be declared a traitor. The Zionists 
do not disdain to label as anti-Semitic anyone who disagrees 
with their sinister plans. Let the Zionist gentlemen not in- 
dulge in lies claiming that the Jews consider their “activity” 
as a blessing. Rodinson, a French Jew, for example, writes 
in Jeune Afrique: ‘The ‘ties’ with Israel were for the most 
part imposed by force on Jews.” 


Agents of Imperialism 


Zionist circles are aware that nothing will come of the 
“fascinating” prospects of consolidating Zionism without the 
blessing of imperialist circles. An intercontinental Zionist 
empire without definite geographical boundaries has already 
been set up. The formation of an imperialist-Zionist syndi- 
cate in support of Israel is a fully obvious reality. 

The essence of the alliance between the United States 
and Israel was commented upon with the utmost frankness 
by the Jerusalem Post. This Israeli newspaper stated that it 
must be made quite clear to Washington that Israel is the 
last bastion of the United States in the Middle East. If 
America does not help Israel unconditionally it is the Ame- 
ricans who will suffer most because they will be driven from 
the Middle East. 

American imperialism with its neo-colonialist policy of 
suppressing the liberation movement of the Arab peoples 
and abolishing progressive regimes constitutes a firm foun- 
dation for Israeli expansion and Zionism. This sinister “syn- 
dicate” has been formalized organizationally within the 
bounds of the international Zionist movement. 

The United Jewish Appeal, a powerful American orga- 
nization, set up a special fund to aid the reactionary forces 
during the counter-revolutionary events in Hungary in 1956. 


104 


Since 1967 it has been organizing annual campaigns for 
donations to Israel’s “emergency fund.” 

The French mission sent to Israel in 1970 to study its 
economic needs included two industrialists, Aboulker and 
Saltillet, furniture manufacturer A. Cleret and others. In 
Amsterdam the Zionists are conducting a “100-day” cam- 
paign for the collection of funds for Israel. At the recent 
session of the International Zionist Congress it was con- 
firmed that in 1969 US aid to Israel reached a record figure 
for the last twenty years. In reply to the piratical raid of 
Israeli aircraft on the Abu Zaabal Steel Works, 64 Ameri- 
can Senators and 243 members of the House of Representa- 
tives issued an appeal not to leave Israel defenceless (!). The 
financial and industrial tycoons who render help to Israel— 
the American Browders and Weiners, the French Roth- 
schilds, the British Siffs and Wolfsons, the West German 
Spitzes and the Italian Meyers who personally or through 
their agents take part in Zionist activities—these are the 
magnates of capital of the United States, Britain, France, 
West Germany, Italy and other countries. It is not surpris- 
ing that the stepped-up activities of international Zionism 
are accompanied by strikingly pronounced anti-communism 
and anti-Sovietism. 

The “Jewish question” in the USSR is repeatedly drag- 
ged out of the rubbish heap by inveterate anti-Sovieteers, 
it is diligently mooted at all Zionist congresses and confe- 
rences which are turned into international rostrums of anti- 
communism. 


The last, 27th Congress of the World Zionist Organiza- 
tion adopted a “New Programme of Jerusalem” which calls 
upon all Jews to return to the land of Israel. Here you have 
the Zionist solution to the problem of occupied Arab territo- 
ries. 

The Israeli extremists are interested in escalating the 
war. But it is high time for them and their international 
patrons to realize that the progressive forces the world over 
do not possess infinite patience. The Israeli aggressors must 
not be allowed to ignore perpetually the decisions of the 
United Nations. The Israeli and international Zionists are 
endangering the very existence of the state of Israel whose 
only prospect of developing is by the complete de-Zioniza- 
tion and democratization of the country in all spheres of 
public life. Only by completely renouncing annexationist 


4n—474 103 


aspirations is it possible to count on the establishment of a 
lasting peace between Arab states and Israel. 


NIKITINA, Candidate of Law 
Literaturnaya Gazeta, March 25, 1970. 


Secret Servants of Zionism 


Each day brings fresh evidence of the 
mounting ideological struggle which is part 
and parcel of the world class battle. It would 
be wrong to think that the bourgeoisie will 
give up without a fight. It shows its teeth 
and seeks to increase its influence over the 
masses, to indoctrinate the working people. 
Imperialism has evolved its strategy for 
struggle against the world communist and 
the national-liberation movements in which 
ideological sabotage plays a specific role. In- 
ternational Zionism by no means takes a 
back seat among the 300 or so anti-commun- 
ist centres and organizations in the imperial- 
ist states. The Soviet press has carried many 
articles exposing the aggressive essence of 
Zionism as a tool of imperialism. The article 
below reveals still another, hidden aspect of 
Zionist activity. 


Let us imagine we are at Abu Zaabal near Cairo, the 
scene of a tragedy now known throughout the world which 
took place a month and a half ago. On February 12 Israeli 
planes dropped their lethal load on the iron and steel works, 
turning it into a heap of rubble. The UAR Government 
allowed journalists from many countries to visit Abu 
Zaabal, so that the world could learn the truth about the 
crimes committed by the Israeli military. All who visited 
Abu Zaabal realized full well that it had been a premedita- 
ted action and that the target—a peaceful objective—had 
been chosen and plotted on the navigation map beforehand, 
that Tel Aviv’s statement about a “navigational error” was 
simply an attempt by the ruling circles in Israel to pacify 


106 


public opinion. {t was quite obvious that before the Israeli 
planes took off and headed for Abu Zaabal, somebody had 
been there and had jotted down the location of the plant in 
his notebook. 

.. Nights are dark on the Red Sea in December. Only a 
faint twinkle of stars is reflected in the velvety waters, and 
occasionally the signal lights of fishing boats drift by. On 
a day like this a self-propelled barge put out without lights. 
The wind did not flutter the flags-on her masts, nor was 
there any of the usual activity on deck. Slowly, like a ghost, 
the barge sailed farther and farther out onto the open sea. 
When the shore disappeared from view, she suddenly beca- 
me alive. On curt military orders, a couple of soldiers in 
UAR uniform began feverishly rolling up the vast tarpau- 
lin that covered the load. The “load” proved to be a mili- 
tary transport helicopter bearing a freshly painted UAR 
Air Force identification sign. Any specialist examining the 
craft, would have seen at once that it was a US-made heli- 
copter of the latest make. Inside was a small military ve- 
hicle specially adapted for desert conditions. Eleven sol- 
diers and an officer boarded the helicopter and shortly after- 
ward it took off and disappeared into dark... 

For the guard at the small railway bridge, the appea- 
rance at dawn of a car with Arab soldiers was not unexpect- 
ed. They had been notified that a relief was on the way. 
The only thing that surprised the man in charge was the 
number of soldiers making up the relief. But he had no 
time to mention his doubts to the others before the men from 
the car fired on them. Four Arab soldiers fell to the ground. 
The officer in charge of the new arrivals gave an order in 
a foreign language. Three of his team finished off the mor- 
tally wounded guards with their knives as they writhed on 
the ground. A few minutes later the bridge was blown up. 
Again an order was given. The car with the UAR army 
identification vanished behind the nearest sand-dune. A lit- 
tle later the helicopter whirred into the air and was off to- 
wards the sea... 

.. Odessa welcomes tourists coming to the Soviet Union. 
Thousands of them visit our country every year. An Ameri- 
can tourist, Feiga Crown, wished to visit the USSR and par- 
ticularly Odessa where, she claimed, she had “a host of ac- 
quaintances.” There were indeed people she knew there. 
They were most hospitable and spared neither time, nor 


45* 107 


effort to help the “dear guest” from across the Atlantic to 
see the city. But Madame Crown was not much interested 
in sightseeing. The American lady, among other things, 
wanted to know about the passport regulations for the city 
of Nikolayev. Several times a day she would ask acquain- 
tances to introduce her to somebody who could tell her about 
the cosmodrome in Baikonur... 


Unlike Mme Crown, Mr. Dugan (also a foreign tourist) 
did not have acquaintances in Odessa. To get to know peo- 
ple he became a regular visitor to the city’s crowded beach. 
It’s not hard to strike up a friendship on the golden sand. 
The relaxed atmosphere and beach informality is conducive 
to making acquaintances quickly... Mr. Dugan knew his 
business well. He soon found people who could supply him 
with information and asked them questions such as the 
whereabouts of an enterprise, its output, technological in- 
novations, plans for the future. 


Eventually he found a person who carelessly answered 
these strange, to say the least, questions from a mere 
acquaintance. This was Soviet engineer V. who was em- 
ployed at a plant in the Urals. He blurted out some things 
he should have kept mum about... 

The Israeli saboteurs on Arab territory, Mme Crown and 
Mr. Dugan had different assignments, but all from the same 
place—the Israeli secret service. 


The Israeli secret service. Yes, Israel has its own secret 
service, a “cloak and dagger” service functioning in that 
small state and very closely connected with international 
Zionism. International Zionism spawned its own secret ser- 
vices, which, after the formation of the state of Israel, gave 
rise to the Israeli secret service of the aggressive Tel Aviv 
circles that faithfully does their bidding. 


Would you like a closer look at the Israeli secret service? 
Come along. At the head of all sections in the Israeli secret 
service is the so-called ‘“‘central coordinating committee” di- 
rectly subordinate to the Prime Minister. The committee 1s 
headed by a highly trusted person whose name is top secret. 
The committee supervises the activities of all the intelligen- 
ce and counter-intelligence agencies in Israel, which include 
the following: 

— the “Central Department for Intelligence and Securi- 
ty” or “Reshut mosad.” This department is engaged in gene- 


108 


ral strategic and tactical intelligence abroad, both officially 
and illegally i.e., by planting its agents in foreign states; 

— the ‘“Counter-Intelligence Service’—‘“Sherut betaho- 
ni” or “Shinbet.” This service is engaged in counter-intelli- 
gence work and in recruiting agents in Israel from among 
foreign citizens coming there as tourists or on business; 

— the “Military Intelligence Department’”—‘Sherut 
modein.” This department, like all sections of the Israeli 
secret service, is formally subordinated to the “Central Coor- 
dinating Committee.” Yet, in practice, it operates under the 
control of the General Staff of the Israeli Army and recei- 
ves its orders directly from the Defence Minister. One of 
the major subsections of this department is the “Special 
Operations Service” including several units, among them 
“Special Group—100.” It is this special intelligence unit 
that was responsible for blowing up the railway bridge and 
killing the Egyptian soldiers. “Special Group—100” trains 
and uses its agents for murder, demolition jobs, arson and 
other subversive acts in Arab states adjacent to Israel. 
In other countries terroristic acts and sometimes subversion 
is handled by other special sections of the Israeli secret ser- 
vice, sections with corresponding code numbers: from 130 
and on. These sections also organize anti-Arab provocations 
which are used to whip up propaganda campaigns. This hap- 
pened in the case of an aircraft accident engineered in Swit- 
zerland. The agents of a section operating in West Euro- 
pean countries also organized the sensational smuggling of 
five gun boats out of France. 

Aside from the comparatively small regular staff of the 
Israeli secret service inside the country, the service uses the 
secret agents and even its own regular employees in Zionist 
organizations in the USA, Britain, the FRG and other im- 
perialist states, and numerous agents scattered throughout 
the world. This specific nature of the operation of Israel’s 
secret services is fully in conformity with the “theoretical 
foundations” of Zionism. 


What does modern Zionism proceed from? From the 
classical premises of Zionist ideology; Zionism draws on 
anti-Semitism, preaches the existence of a “world” or a “sin- 
gle” Jewish “nation” which suffers eternal exile. Zionist 
ideologists planned to solve the “Jewish problem” by annex- 
ing alien lands, to create an independent state. Present-day 
Zionists state that the solution of the “Jewish problem’’ is 


109 


possible only through the “re-union of exiles.” This making 
of the “unity of the Jewish nation” and its isolation an ab- 
solute in every way leads to the assertion that the Jews are 
the “chosen people,” that the “Jewish race” is superior. One 
of the present-day Zionist ideologists, M. Liliental, writes: 
‘An average Jew, from parents to child, you are exclusive: 
you are a Jew. .. Since Israel is called upon to unite the cho- 
sen people, and other peoples, it still remains something ex- 
clusive in the family of nations.” Another author, I. Badi, 
says in his book Religion in Israel Today. Relations Between 
the State and Religion: “Israel is not a nation by nature, it 
bears no resemblance to any nation in the world. It is a su- 
per-natural society...” 

It is this notion of ‘Jewish exclusiveness,” this worn-out 
Zionist concept, which alleges that wherever a citizen of the 
Jewish nation lives he is a citizen of Israel and, consequent- 
ly, must do everything international Zionism requires from 
him, that the Israeli intelligence service goes by. What is the 
approach of an Israeli secret agent in establishing relations 
with a person he is interested in? He approaches him as 
“one Jew would approach another.” He only wants to know 
how “his brethren” live, what they are, what acquaintances 
they have, and so on and so forth. Then, if this trick does 
not work, more serious means are resorted to: bribery, black- 
mail, ordinary threats and even threats to kill. All this, of 
course, is accompanied by a good measure of reasoning 
about the necessity of being loyal to Jewry, by recalling 
“prophetic” utterances of Ben Gurion, the new Messiah of 
Zionism. “The Jews who lived (and consequently who live) 
outside Israel were atheists and violated Judaist command- 
ments every day they spent outside the country,” he clai- 
med. “Every Jew must have an inner conviction that Zion- 
ism has one meaning today: ‘Zion’... Israel must be the 
centre of world Jewry, its supreme torch and pride.” 

Is this not a total ideological offensive on the 12 mil- 
lion Jews who live outside Israel? Is this not the basis on 
which the Israeli secret service is recruiting its agents? 


What is the Israeli secret service doing now? What is 
its problem No. 1? Today the main forces of Israel’s special 
services have been given the task of providing information 
for Tel Aviv’s aggressive strategy spearheaded against Arab 
states. Israeli spies and saboteurs will stoop to anything. 
They use smugglers, narcotics peddlers and misfits, in a 


110 


word, everybody who can be bought or intimidated, as their 
agents... 

Of course, the Israeli secret service does not forget the 
socialist countries and the Soviet Union. It is actively work- 
ing against them. True, since diplomatic relations between 
the Soviet Union and Israel were broken off, the Israeli sec- 
ret service is finding it more and more difficult to work. Be- 
fore, shielded by the Israeli Embassy in Moscow, resident 
agents worked under the code name of “Netiva” and the 
Embassy’s Second Secretary Colonel Levanon, who was the 
agents’ chief, succeeded (blessed are those who believe!) in 
establishing some contacts with Jewish citizens. Now there 
are no such opportunities. 

This is the reason why representatives of the Israeli sec- 
ret service are looking for suitable “tourists” visiting this 
and other socialist countries to use them as spies and begui- 
lers of naive souls, still believing that Mount Zion is only a 
peaceful refuge of the Jews who assembled there to live by 
the principles of the Old Testament. 

By the way, Mme Crown and Mr. Dugan stayed for a 
while in Tel Aviv before coming to the Soviet Union. 


V. LYADOV and I. SIDOROV 
Izvestia, March 30, 1970. 


The Octopus’s Tentacles 


A big parcel arrived from Tel Aviv by mail. It contai- 
ned a nice-looking brochure well illustrated, with map and 
diagrams, entitled The Middle East in the Year 2000. A 
Project. The “peace association” founded in Israel in 1968, 
which circulates the “project,” asks recipients to express 
their views as to what is in store for the Middle East at the 
turn of the century and obligingly supplies them with 
‘source data” and “experimental ideas.” 

In short, the idea is to think of the future of the Middle 
East and to forget the past and the present. It is suggested 
that we abstract ourselves from the urgent problems of to- 
day, forget Israel’s continuing aggression against Arab coun- 
tries and not think of the necessity for prompt action to eli- 
minate the consequences of aggression and reach a peaceful 
settlement in this “hot spot” of the planet. 


111 


But let us first glance through the pages of the past and 
turn to the facts of today: this is essential for understanding 
Tel Aviv’s “experimental ideas” for the year 2000. 

The state of Israel has existed for slightly more than two 
decades. All this time, the country’s ruling circles have ser- 
ved as instruments of imperialist aggression. The Israeli sol- 
diery reared by international Zionism has repeatedly un- 
leashed war against Arab countries, and caused millions of 
Arabs untold suffering. 

War has become the bloody business of Israeli rulers. 
There is good reason why ex-Premier of Israel Ben Gurion, 
once told foreign newspapermen that the dirtiest trick the 
Arabs could have played on Israel would have been to con- 
clude a peace with her. 

Israel’s finances have long been undermined, but milita- 
ry expenditures are soaring because Israeli ruling circles 
have pawned and sold their country to foreign capital time 
and again. The country is known to have received more than 
7,000 million dollars from abroad by the time of the June 
1967 war—chiefly from the USA and the FRG—in all kinds 
of assistance, private capital investments, donations, etc. 

The “Bond” organization has sold more than a thousand 
million dollars’ worth of Israeli securities abroad. A cam- 
paign has been launched to sell an additional 250 million 
dollars’ worth of securities. The Bank of America agreed to 
grant Israel a 30 million dollar loan and the US Govern- 
ment promised assistance to the sum of 100 million dollars. 
Meanwhile, Israeli rulers have been raising taxes and forc- 
ing the masses to tighten their belts. 


The war and the new capital received to back it have 
to a certain extent propped up Israeli economy which expe- 
rienced a slump in 1966 and 1967. However, the economy 
is acquiring an increasingly one-sided, distorted nature for 
the war industry and military construction which consume 
almost half the state budget are being developed at the ex- 
pense of other sectors. Israel not only produces armaments, 
it deals in them, as well. Der Spiegel writes that Israeli 
submachine guns, for instance, have been sold to 50 coun- 
tries. West-German tankmen, Nixon’s bodyguards and some 
special units of the “green berets” in Vietnam are armed 
with them... 

The war, combined with Zionist propaganda designed to 
intimidate the Jewish population in other countries, has be- 


112 


come a source of manpower for Israel. Le Figaro wrote that 
Israel was different from any other state and that the most 
dangerous thing for it would be to have to live under nor- 
mal conditions. .. Can one forget there was a time when the 
big problem was whether the decline in anti-Semitism might 
not undermine (!) the very foundation of the existence of 
the Jewish state. The newspaper pointed out that Zionist 
ideologists and Zionist leaders could relax now. The news- 
paper which fervently defends the interests of Israeli rulers 
leaves no doubt that they are deliberately attempting to fan 
anti-Semitism in other countries, as Ben Gurion once re- 
commended, in order to get Jews to replenish Israeli gun- 
fodder reserves. But it is also true that the pro-Zionist press 
deliberately hushes up the number of people leaving Israel 
after having to contend with the way of life in the “Pro- 
mised Land.” 

Last but not least, the adventurist plans of the Israeli top 
leaders regarding the seizure of fresh territories, the wealth 
of the Arab countries, are connected with the war too. The 
sentiments prevailing in Tel Aviv regarding this were elo- 
quently expressed by a Minister of the Israeli Government, 
General Ezer Weizmann, who said: ‘““What you call occupied 
territories I call Israel.” 

When the Minister was asked about plans for creating 
an Israeli inhabited centre in the area of the occupied Arab 
city of Hebron, he said: 

“Hebron was, is and will be a part of Israel. King David 
was crowned there, and there he reigned for seven years and 
six months (!)”. 

The Tel Aviv general was referring to Israel’s three- 
thousand-year-old mythical “rights.” The Zionist fanatic is 
not embarrassed by the fact that his claims are as absurd 
as, say, the demand to revive the Roman Empire, the Arab 
Caliphate or the empire of Charles the Great. 


Incidentally, the reference to King David is not so much 
a tribute to the past as an attempt to somehow cover up the 
aggressive essence of present-day Zionist ideology and poli- 
cy. The newspaper, Le Figaro, was more frank than Gene- 
ral Weizmann when it openly declared: Israel “is a state of 
‘commandos’ which organizes ‘commando’ raids and pursues 
a ‘commando’ policy.” 

Such recognition of the adventurist, predatory essence of 
the policy of the present Israeli rulers gives a very definite 


113 


colouring to the “experimental ideas” expressed by the 
authors of the “project” of Tel Aviv’s “peace association,” 
who propose that we visualize the year 2000. 

The authors of the ‘“‘project” assume that “all the present 
Arab states and Israel will exist in 2000” and that the 
“Palestinian problem will be solved either within the frame- 
works of the existing Arab state (?) or through the newly 
developing Palestinian state.” It is hard to understand these 
extremely vague utterances regarding the “Palestinian pro- 
blem.” In view of what Golda Meir and other representa- 
tives of the Israeli rulers are saying today one can draw but 
one conclusion: the Israeli Zionists are trying to deny the 
very fact of the existence of the Palestinian Arab people, 
their right to national distinctiveness. The Tel Aviv vultures 
are advocating the Dayan doctrine of “accomplished facts”: 
what has been seized from the Arabs will on no account be 
returned. 

One can easily see that when the authors of the “project” 
talk about certain “Palestinians,” this is nothing but an at- 
tempt to slur over this thorny problem and to reassure world 
public opinion that is seriously concerned about the destinies 
of the Palestinian people. 

Refraining from determining the borders in the Middle 
East the “oracles” claim that by 2000 the borders will, so 
to speak, lose their significance. Yes, national states will 
exist but the “borders will be open,” cooperation between 
countries “will overstep national borders.” One can easily 
see what is behind these fine words of the authors of the 
“project.” 

At the turn of the century, they estimate, the population 
of the United Arab Republic will number 50-60 million, 
Israel—five million, Iran—60 million, Iraq—about 20 mil- 
lion, the Lebanon—five million. But according to economic 
indices Israel, it seems, will allegedly be able, with the help 
of the imperialist powers, primarily the United States, to far 
outstrip all other countries in the area. Israel will suppo- 
sedly possess the most experienced technical specialists, the 
most perfect equipment, etc. 


Under these conditions, according to the authors of the 
“project,” it will be up to Israel to work for the establish- 
ment of a “common market” of the Middle East countries, 
a market whose supra-national authorities would allegedly 
control oil, industry and agriculture, the reclamation of de- 


114 


serts, the construction of irrigation systems, etc. This “com- 
mon market,” according to their plans, will closely coope- 
rate with the existing Common Market, as well as the “com- 
mon market” of Southeast Asia and the “common market 
of Maghreb,” which, it is assumed, will be established. 

The picture of the future, as portrayed by the “peace- 
makers” from Tel Aviv, proceeds from the assumption that 
by the year 2000, not much will change in the life of the 
Middle East countries. Their role is to be merely a source 
of oil and agricultural products; to manufacture light indus- 
try goods (except for the UAR that has its own heavy indus- 
try). The Israeli colonialists are obviously “planning” that 
these countries will be short of educated personnel, ‘T'V sets 
and computers, and unable to cope with the problems of de- 
serts and water. Apparently in view of this it will be up 
to Israel to shape the destinies of the Middle East. 

And in the Tel Aviv “project” we see not a “comman- 
do” state, but an octopus state with its tentacles stretching to 
the Middle East oil, to sources of water, to seas in the area 
and deserts. In the activities of the octopus, backed by the 
monopolies of the USA, Britain and Western Germany, one 
can see the long familiar behaviour of the colonialists of all 
brands who for decades have been strangling the peoples of 
Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Iran and other countries in the area. 

That is the kind of future that Tel Aviv wants to impose 
on the Middle East. 

Yet the future is not a relapse into the past. The peo- 
ples of the area definitely do not want to mark the year 
9000 with a revival of the century-old colonialist order. 
“Imposing Israeli terms on the Arabs, turning the territory 
of their countries into a sphere of undivided American in- 
fluence in which Israel would play the part of mediator, 
expert and watchdog” is an unrealizable aim, says the Cairo 
newspaper Al-Coumhouria. The Arab peoples believe in 
their future and are fighting for it. 

World Zionism and the Israeli ruling circles have now 
become a major tool of imperialist reaction. And this kind 
of role played by Israel is a most unreliable guarantee of 
its future. That is precisely why progressives in that coun- 
try, those really concerned with the destinies of the Israeli 
people, reject the adventurist policies of the Tel Aviv ru- 
lers, and jointly with the peoples of the Arab countries and 
all progressive mankind, work to end the Israeli aggression, 


115 


to eliminate the consequences of the aggression, for a peace- 
ful settlement in the Middle East. 


V. MAYEVSKY 
Pravda, May 15, 1970. 


Fascism under the Blue Star 


Many people associate the word “fascism” with the hor- 
rors of the Second World War, the brown columns of Hit- 
ler’s stormtroopers, the swastika, the phalanges of Franco's 
thugs, the blackshirts of Mussolini, the smouldering ruins 
of cities and villages, the barbed wire of death camps, the 
haggard faces of those who survived the torture chambers. .. 

And then one recalls the final—the Nuremberg Tribunal. 
The chief war criminals, fascists, were pilloried there by 
history and sent to the gallows. They got their due. 

Now, twenty years after the Nuremberg Trial, we 
watch neo-Nazism rise in the FRG and see another brand of 
modern fascism burgeon under the Israeli state flag showing 
a six-pointed blue star, the “star of David” against a back- 
ground of blue and white. 

This is also the flag of Zionism and of its head organt- 
zation, the World Zionist Organization, founded towards the 
end of the last century. This organization, whose real bosses 
are money-bags and owners of major world monopolies, 
tries to usurp the “right” to speak in the name of the world 
Jewry. 

Zionist leaders and Israeli rulers demand that Jews, 
wherever they may live, under whatever social system, fulfil 
“duties” which are, in fact, incompatible with their citizen- 
ship and civic loyalty. 

Founded at the turn of this century, Zionist organiza- 
tions had, by the mid-20th century, become an essential 
element in the ideological arsenal of imperialism and its 
aggressive policy. 

On the world scene Zionism is a bitter opponent of 
Marxism-Leninism—the proletarian ideology. Organizatio- 
nally, the Zionist movement is widely ramified and far- 


flung. 
116 


The ideologists of Zionism seek to impart to this reactio- 
nary philosophy certain features that would make it at least 
outwardly different from other reactionary ideologies and 
give them scope for manoeuvre. They try, ignoring facts, 
to take over, as their own the traditions and activities both 
of Jewish religious communities and secular organizations 
that existed long before the advent of Zionism; to build a 
modern political structure on a historical foundation and to 
combine the two into a single system that would serve as a 
cover for aggressive imperialist strivings. 

Zionist leaders try to convince people that Zionism is an 
“exceptional,” “supraclass” phenomenon and to give it 
“theoretical” substantiation. They turn to specially selected 
myths and religious dogmas in an attempt to sanctify and 
“ennoble” the aims of Zionism. 

The whole system, the model, designed by Zionists to 
prove to the world the “irrefutability” of the Zionist ideolo- 
gy, which is actually not at all complex, is comprised of 
axioms, i.e. assertions taken for truth. We believe that this 
problem should be approached not as a system of axioms, 
but rather as a set of theorems which have to be proved. 

The evidence thus produced is confirmed by experience, 
objective realities, history, ethnography, and biology. How 
can anyone, claiming scientific objectivity, earnestly assert 
that the ancient peoples—the Philistines, Assyrians, Canaans, 
Sumerians had all vanished, dissolved in the boundless hu- 
man ocean, while a small people which, incidentally, had 
never been great conquerors or had founded a mighty empi- 
re, has survived contrary to the logic of history? 


It has been rightly said that the myth, even if disguised 
as science, is not a discovery of the 20th century. But, as 
someone has said: “Myths purporting to stem from science 
may have dire social consequences. One need only recall the 
racial myth which originated within the confines of pure 
science.” Thus it has long been scientifically established that 
the ancient Jewish people have long dissolved among other 
peoples. Only the word “Jew” survived and became the tra- 
ditional name for numerous ethnic groups widely dissimilar, 
and far removed from one another anthropologically, living 
in different geographical areas and national states. Religious 
Jews share one thing in common—Judaism and traditions 
associated with it. 

A. B. Ranovich, a well-known scholar who has thorough- 


117 


ly examined this question, pointed out that the principal pro- 
cess of ethnic division of the ancient Hebrews continually 
took place and became more marked in the course of histori- 
cal development and socio-economic and political changes, 
and it ended in the total disappearance of this people which 
became absorbed by the peoples inhabiting the Near East, 
Southwest Asia, Africa and Europe. 

Nevertheless, the untruth that there exists a “world Je- 
wish nation,” “the eternal nation” has been turned by Zio- 
nists into a sacred dogma. 

A second dogma upheld by the Zionist and zealously 
propagated by the synagogues is “the special mission of the 
Jewish people, a people chosen by God; its superiority to all 
other peoples and its special innate gifts.” Ben Gurion, for- 
mer Israeli President, said in an interview with Gertrude 
Samuels, a US journalist, soon after the “six-day” war, that 
its outcome confirmed the words of Prophet Moses contained 
in the Torah and addressed to the Jews: “You are not nu- 
merous amid other peoples and therefore you must be ‘am 
segula’. I am not able to give you the exact translation of 
these words,” said Ben Gurion, “but the meaning is this: you 
must be better than other peoples.” Ilya Ehrenburg had 
once made the following comment in connection with such 
arguments: “Dwarfs need stilts, and people lacking self- 
assurance usually shout about their racial, inherent natio- 
nal supremacy.” 

Zionists ought to be thankful to Hitler, for the mad 
Fuehrer in his Mein Kampf upheld the principal tenet of 
Zionism when he spoke about the existence of “a world Je- 
wish nation,” “the Jewish race.” 

Still another Zionist dogma consists in the claim that 
“anti-Semitism is century-old.” According to Zionists, all 
non-Jews are their sworn enemies and must be hated. 


The synagogue, the mainstay of the Zionist regime in 
Israel, has done much to propagandize this dogma, especial- 
ly among those of Judaic faith. For them it is consoling to 
live in the ethereal world of Judaism with its simple values 
which differ so widely from “earthly” values. But this very 
simplicity tends to alienate them from the outside world, and 
creates the impression that the world beyond their commu- 
nity, Judaism, fenced off by the invisible walls of the moral 
ghetto, is something inferior and ill-ordered. 

The results of the polls recently held in Israel reveal a 


118 


frightening picture of degeneration of social consciousnéss 
in Israeli society. 

In reply to the question of what they thought about the 
demolition of Arab dwellings on occupied territory, 86 per 
cent of those polled said they welcomed these acts, 7 per 
cent said they did not care (the Second World War showed 
that indifference is also a crime) and only 7 per cent were 
against the acts. Such are the fruits of Zionist ideological 
indoctrination. These are indisputable facts. Numerous 
eyewitnesses have testified that the Israeli military have per- 
petrated pogromist actions on occupied Arab territory. 


Three Jordanian villages, Zeita, Beit Nuba and Yalu, 
were situated near the Israeli border at a distance of 45 ki- 
lometres from Jerusalem. The four thousand inhabitants of 
these villages cultivated grapes which the monks of the Lat- 
run monastery made into wine. These villages have disap- 
peared without a trace. On June 12, 1967, they were blotted 
out by the Israeli Army. International law qualifies such 
actions as genocide, as a crime against humanity. 


For this, as well as other crimes, did the nations of the 
world condemn the Nazi butchers after the defeat of fas- 
cism. 


Now a group of people, opposing itself to the nations of 
the world, is turning into a bunch of gangsters, into a fas- 
cist horde. 


Differences between social groups, the social psychology 
of an outsider have always been exploited by the darkest 
forces. I would like to quote the following words from a 
recent issue of a magazine: “Nobody can deny a German 
the right to be a German, but when Hitler counterposed all 
that is German to all that is human there arose national so- 
cialism with all its implications.” In exactly the same way, 
no one can deny the right of an Israeli Jew to be a Jew, 
but when Zionism counterposed all that is Jewish to all that 
is human, there arose the tragedy of the Palestinian people, 
and a protracted conflict erupted whose outcome is hard to 
foresee and which has already given rise to a whole series 
of complex problems. 

Thus the Israeli Communists are right when they say 
that the pathological nationalistic egoism of Zionist chauvi- 
nists represents the most dangerous aspect of their position. 
This is a danger which overhangs not only the Arab popula- 


119 


tion of North Africa and West Asia but the rest of the 
world. It is a threat to world peace. 

Zionists threaten to kindle the flames of war because 
they have no concern for anyone else but themselves. 

The Israeli policy of steady escalation of tensions in the 
Middle East, the piratical operations of the Israeli Air 
Force and land units, the atrocities perpetrated by the Isra- 
eli military on occupied Arab lands are reminiscent of the 
nazi crimes. Like the nazis, Zionists today go all out to 
brainwash the Jewish youth, to poison their minds forever 
ideologically. 

The Israeli Ministry of Public Education issued a direc- 
tive which says in the part concerning the Arab population 
in Israel: “Arabs in Israel are the fifth column either volun- 
tarily or under coercion.” Military training in Israeli schools 
takes up 272 hours a year. In the last two years of the eight- 
year school more hours are allotted to the study of the To- 
rah than to that of all mathematical subjects combined. 

In the four-year gymnasium (which follows the eight- 
year school) more hours are allotted to the study of the To- 
rah than to the study of the language and history. But Israe- 
li rulers are not content with this. Thus they have introdu- 
ced a subject called “national consciousness,’ which strongly 
suggests rabid chauvinism. 

No wonder that Israeli children are always ready with 
the answer to the question: “What is to be done with the 
Arabs?” “Kill them!” they say. 

Another mystification is the conception of Zionism as the 
Jewish liberation movement, which is a highly specific form 
of nationalism. But the advocates of this conception “omit” 
to mention that this brand of Zionism is espoused by the 
big Jewish bourgeoisie, and it is only after some time, under 
the impact of brainwashing which the Zionists have used for 
duping Jewish working people, that it came to be accepted 
by some Jewish communities. 


The myth of “universal anti-Semitism,” and one version 
of it known as “official and universal anti-Semitism in the 
USSR” feature prominently in the Zionist ideological strug- 
gle against socialism. And what evidence have the Zionists 
offered for such claims? Zionist propaganda does not need 
any. Absurd concoction will do! Insolence is what counts. 
Pour out lies in defiance of logic and common sense! All the 
better if the concoctions are preposterous; they may more 


> 


120 


quickly attract attention, and someone may well fall for 
them. 

The purpose of such lics and concoctions is to justify 
the anti-Soviet and anti-communist activities pursued by 
the worldwide network of Zionist organizations. 

The Zionist brand of anti-communism has been given 
“theoretical” substantiation. A document put out by Zionists, 
dated 1898, has been preserved in the State Archives of the 
October Revolution. It says in part: “Socialism is a mortal 
enemy of the Jewry, of the idea of the Jewish nation.” 

In its struggle against communism Zionism goes to any 
lengths, skilfully resorting to camouflage and assuming the 
role of a champion of universal social progress (for the pur- 
pose of misleading non-Zionists and those who do not know 
what Zionism stands for). 

It resorts to manoeuvres and chicanery in order to knock 
together alliances that might win a maximum number of 
supporters and sympathizers for the Zionist cause. 

Using demagogy, Zionists try to incite the base instincts 
of people and turn them against “objectionable” parties and 
individuals. 

In October 1967, an attempt was made on the life of 
Meir Vilner, General Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Israeli Communist Party. Vilner had dared to raise his 
voice against the policy of aggression and national suicide, 
pursued by the Israeli rulers. A reign of terror was let loose 
against the “only party that has courageously condemned 
the pro-imperialist policy of Tel-Aviv. Every day orders of 
the Vorster type were issued to restrict the travel of Com- 
munists inside the country (... forbidden without permit... 
to leave the area... for more than...); arrests without war- 
rants and trial, beatings and tortures of the arrested have 
been reported. People were beaten in the streets while being 
arrested and in prison cells. It looked very much like Ger- 
many of the Third Reich,” commented the African Com- 
munist, the organ of the Communists of South Africa. 


One of the aims of Zionism as an agent of modern im- 
perialism is to arrest progressive social changes. To this end 
it widely resorts to police brutality and pogroms for supres- 
sing opposition. 

The older generations of Riga residents have a lot to tell 
about the activities of the “Trumpeldor,” a Zionist-fascist 
organization, whose hoodlum-like members raided the Lat- 


121 


vian Young Communist League and Communist organiza- 
tions, disrupted and dispersed YCL meetings in the 1930s. 


The International Herald Tribune has recently carried 
reports about an organization called the Jewish Defence 
League, founded in the USA by Rabbi Meir Kahane. Its 
members became notorious the world over for their hoodlum 
sallies at concerts given by Soviet musicians. 


The League took part in anti-Soviet demonstrations in 
front of the building of the Soviet Mission to the UN in 
New York; its members raided the Aeroflot and TASS offi- 
ces there. The Herald Tribune account of the activities of 
the hoodlums of the Jewish Defence League began with the 
words: “Violence if necessary.” Violence is in vogue in the 
USA today, as well as terrorist reactionary organizations 
like the American Legion, the John Birch Society, which are 
closely linked with the Jewish Defence League. Fuehrer 
Kahane maintains contacts with the American Jewish Com- 
mittee, an ultra-reactionary organization. It is not accidental 
that the League members take training courses in karate 
wrestling. 

Let us now consider the more dangerous if less noisy 
Zionist elements which have considerable influence over the 
attitudes and policies of the governments of a number of 
countries with respect to Israel and its aggressive course. 
“The deep rear” of Israel is far removed from the Middle 
East, said Abba Eban, the Israeli Foreign Minister. It 1s 
formed by Zionist organizations operating openly in more 
than 60 countries in line with the instructions issued by the 
World Zionist Organization and formulated in New York. 


The reference-book Associations in the USA published 
in New York, shows that nearly 5 million 800 thousand 
American Jews are united in various organizations, and 
committees. Considering the fact that many people appa- 
rently belong to several organizations at the same time it 
is safe to assume that Zionist bosses want to make believe 
that they enjoy the support of practically all Jews living in 
the US. 

Political Affairs, the theoretical organ of the US Com- 
munist Party, drew attention to the attempts of Zionists to 
extend their popular base. It stressed that the big and mid- 
dle bourgeoisie exert a powerful influence on American 
Jews, urging them to support the aggressive government po- 


122 


licy, and fostering in them anti-communist and anti-Soviet 
sentiments. 

The B’nai B’rith (i. e. the sons of the Eternal Union), one 
of the biggest Zionist organizations, is also one of the fana- 
tic anti-communist organizations. It has nearly 500,000 
members united in over 2 000 lodges, and functioning in 42 
countries. Its headquarters is in Washington. In order to 
carry out subversive activities more effectively and to be as 
close as possible to the East European socialist countries, the 
Zionist bosses stationed the office of one of the main B’nai 
B’rith branches in West Berlin. Members of B’nai B’rith in- 
clude financiers, statesmen, politicians, writers, critics—the 
“intellectual elite.” Under the B’nai B’rith Charter its mem- 
bers are allowed to join any parties and organizations. The 
B’nai B’rith structure is similar to that of the Free Mason 
Society. The members must obey their superiors absolutely 
and pledge utmost secrecy. 

B’nai B’rith members use special signs and passwords as 
means of identification. Mention should also be made of 
such organizations as the B’nai B’rith Women and their 
affiliation—the B’nai B’rith Organization; Hadassah, a wo- 
men’s Zionist organization; the Jewish Labour Committee, 
a right-wing social-democratic organization; the Associa- 
tion of Zionist Organizations of America and others. 

The National Committee for Labour Israel and the 
World Union of Progressive Judaism also carry out pro- 
Israeli activities and organize pro-Israeli propaganda cam- 
paigns. 

Besides these major organizations there exist hundreds of 
minor organizations promoting the cause of Israel. 

The vast funds at the disposal of Zionists, donated by 
big bankers and monopolists, enable them to influence the 
broadest strata of the US population, to recruit supporters 
from among non-Jewish people, to engage in active Zionist 
propaganda in the press and to pay for services rendered 
by influential US politicians and Congressmen. 


In 1964, 146 Zionist-oriented papers, weeklies and 
monthly magazines with a total print running into millions 
of copies, were published in English in the USA. According 
to the Washington Post, the US propaganda-makers have 
so effectively brainwashed the country’s population that 
twelve out of thirteen Americans think that the Arabs were 
the first to attack Israel. The Jewish Daily Forward, which 


123 


celebrated the 70th anniversary of its founding in May 
1967, is particularly zealous in its attempts to impress Zion- 
ist ideas on American Jews. This is an extremely reactiona- 
ry publication. We mention it here because it exerts a pro- 
foundly noxious influence upon the US labour movement. 

Its Editor-in Chief, Abram Kagan, has held his post for 
50 years. Kagan’s hatred for the Soviet Union is so intense 
that he automatically considers any fact about Soviet rea- 
lity a negative phenomenon. As one US journalist wittily 
put it, Abe Kagan cannot forgive Soviet Russia the fact 
that there are no Jewish pogroms there. 

Zionists do their utmost to camouflage the sweeping 
scope of their activities, to appear as a weak, inconspicuous 
group. 

One of the favourite methods of the Zionists is to raise a 
hue and cry about any anti-Zionist action, calling it “a foul 
act of anti-Semitism.” Currently in fashion is the term “neo- 
anti-Semitism” which is used by Zionists in labelling anyone 
who tries to tell the truth about Zionism. 

But despite all efforts by the Zionists to cover up their 
activities more and more facts are coming to light which 
show the world public the true face of Zionism. 

The documents of the Second Congress of the Comintern 
contain interesting information (even for a modern reader) 
about subversive Zionist activities in the workers’ and com- 
munist movement. Comrade Frumkina, a delegate to the 
Congress, said the following: “Zionists seek to recruit sup- 
porters in all countries, serving the interests of capitalists by 
their propaganda and agitation work. The Communist In- 
ternational must fight this movement most resolutely.” 


The Second Congress of the Comintern condemned Zion- 

ism as a weapon of imperialism in the Theses on the Natio- 
nal and Colonial Question, which was drafted by a group 
headed by Lenin. Point XI says in part: “The Palestinian 
venture of Zionists and Zionism in general convincingly 
demonstrate how the Entente imperialists and the bourgeoi- 
sie join forces in an attempt to deceive the working mas- 
ses. 
This warning by the Second Congress of the Comintern 
is highly relevant today. Thus Zionism was condemned at 
the Moscow International Conference of Communist and 
Workers’ Parties in June 1969. 

Zionism is undoubtedly an extremely dangerous variety 


124 


of modern anti-communism and racialism. The big bourgeoi- 
sie leans on it as heavily as it once leaned on fascism. And 
this is not surprising, for fascism and Zionism are spiritual 
and political twins. Only the symbols have changed. Instead 
of the swastika, there is now the Star of David on the stan- 
dards of the self-styled crusaders for Lebensraum. 


E. YEVSEEV 
Komsomolskaya Pravda, May 16-17, 1970. 


CuoHH3M — OpyaHe HMNepHancTHYeCcKOH peakuHH 
(BEINycK IT) 
HQ QHeAULCKOM A3ZbIKe 
Llena 20 kon. 


