ZIONISM-Enemy 
of Peace and Social 
Progress 


Issue 4 


Gi 


Progress Publishers 


Moscow 


Translated from the Russian 
Designed by Vadim Kuleshov 
Miscellany compiled by Evgeny Dmitriyev 


CHOHH3M — IIPOTHBHHK MHPA 
HW COWUMAJIBHOTO MPOrPECCA 


Ha anveauticxom a3oiKke 


© U3zatensctso «IIporpecc», 1985 
English translation © Progress Publishers 1985 
Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (01)—85 385 


CONTENTS 


The Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee Press Conference . 


An Interview with D. A. Dragunskii, the Chairman of the Soviet 
Anti-Zionist Committee . a ke 


A Meeting with Journalists in the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee 
on January 19th, 1984 . 


§. Rokotov. Zionism in the Fight Against Socialism and Detente . 


Ye. Dmitriev. The Middle East Settlement in the Context of So- 
viet-American Relations and the Activities of International 


Zionism . 
L. Dadiani. Zionist-Israeli Hegemonism: Past and Present . 


Yu. Sedov. The Tragedy of Lebanon. The Plans and Deeds of the 
Zionist Aggressors . So te) ee eB ee ; 


I. Belyayev. To Tel Aviv and Back 
A. Semioshkin. Zionist Policies with Regard to Jerusalem . 
S. Tarasov. The Goal Justifies the Means . 


V. Olgin. Contradictions Within International Zionism: Myth or 
Reality? . ae % oS be. Be Ge S 

I. Zvyagelskaya. The Role of the Army and the eee in the 
Formation of the Bellicose Ideas of Zionism in the State of 
Israel . 


113 
128 
138 
155 


165 


177 


THE SOVIET ANTI-ZIONIST 
COMMITTEE PRESS 
CONFERENCE 


On June 6th, 1983 the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee held a 
press conference in the press centre of the USSR Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. The following replied to questions from So- 
viet and foreign journalists: D. A. Dragunskii, the chairman of 
the committee, a colonel-general, twice Hero of the Soviet 
Union, head of the “Vystrel” (Shot) superior courses for offi- 
cers, and member of the Central Auditing Commission of the 
CPSU; S. L. Zivs, first deputy chairman, D. Sc. (Law), a profes- 
sor and merited science worker of the RSFSR; M. B. Krupkin, 
deputy chairman and Candidate of Science (Law); Yu. A. Ko- 
lesnikov, deputy chairman and member of the USSR Union of 
Writers; I. P. Belyaev, deputy chairman, head of a section of 
the Literaturnaya Gazeta (Literary Gazette) and D. Sc. (Econ.); 
M. I. Kabachnik, a member of the presidium of the committee, 
academician, Hero of Socialist Labour and holder of the Lenin 
and State prizes; V. V. Pushkarev, a member of the presidium 
of the committee, grinder at the Moscow computer factory and 
deputy to the USSR Supreme Soviet; and G.O. Zimanas, a 
member of the presidium of the committee, chief editor of the 
Communistas magazine and deputy to the Supreme Soviet of 
the Lithuanian SSR. The press conference was conducted by 
V. M. Kamenev, deputy to the head of the press department 
of the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
We publish below the materials of this press conference. 


D, A. Dragunski: Dear comrades, ladies and gentlemen! Near- 
ly one and a half months have. passed since the constituent as- 
sembly established the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee and elected 
its members. One and a half month is, indeed, a short period, but 


5 


Soviet public opinion and the mass media have already showy 
great interest in our work and in the very fact that the Com. 
mittee has been set up. A certain interest has also been pro. 
voked abroad by its establishment. 

In this period we have received more than five hundred let. 
ters from Soviet citizens expressing ardent support for the ini. 
tiative which has been shown. Quite a few letters came from 
abroad, and we have been approached by Soviet and foreign 
journalists. We therefore decided to meet with you today to tell 
you why and how our public organisation was founded, what 
its aims are, and its tasks. We shall also reply to any of your 
questions. 

Everything began at the end of March and early April when 
a group of Soviet ipublic figures made an appeal in the press 
for people to take an active part in the political unmasking of 
Zionism, strike a more decisive blow at the anti-Soviet propa- 
ganda of the Zionists, increase the effectiveness of our work, 
and to this end, to create the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee on 
a voluntary basis. 

We appealed to workers, kolkhozniks, scientists, literary fig- 
ures, artists, journalists—in fact to all the citizens of the vari- 
ous nationalities. We began receiving letters and telegrams 
literally the day after this appeal was published. It met with 
ardent support and, I would say, genuine enthusiasm. This all 
served as the basis for conducting the constituent assembly. We 
were able to state with complete amenability that we had been 
given a public mandate, and that public opinion was reflected 
in this widespread support. We had the right to call ourselves 
a public committee and to speak and appear in the name and 
on behalf of broad Soviet public opinion. 

You may ask why we decided on the need to create the So- 
viet Anti-Zionist Committee at this time. As early as at the be- 
ginning of the century Lenin was conducting the fight with Zi- 
onism, The Soviet people have always approached Zionism as 
they would an ideology concentrating in itself the apology of 
national exceptionalism and the “chosen people’, and, conse- 
quently, as they would a chauvinistic and racist ideology. 

But there has now come a time when imperialism, and above 
all the reactionary circles of the USA, has begun to make ever 
more active and broad use of international Zionism for its own 


6 


urposes, which are dangerous for peace. It is well known that 
the international situation has deteriorated sharply. On 
Washington’s initiative, modern anti-Communist crusaders are 
launching ever new attacks, and a big part in this global offen- 
sive against peace and progress is attributable to international 
Zionism and the ruling circles of Israel. The hypocritical, pro- 

agandistic and patently defamatory actions of the ideological 
and political adventurists from the ranks of international Zi- 
onism are all part of the West’s “psychological war” against the 
Soviet Union. 

The year which has passed has confirmed with particular 
clarity that, in its development, Zionism, its misanthropic ideo- 
logy and practice is ever more obviously reproducing the ideas 
and methods of crushed Hitlerite fascism. The events in Leba- 
non showed the whole world that the crimes of Begin and his 
henchmen hardly differ from the atrocities perpetrated by the 
Hitlerites. All this prompted us to declare that the time had come 
to carry on a more organised fight against international Zi- 
onism and strike a blow at its anti-Soviet propaganda. 

On that point I shall finish my short introduction. My col- 
leagues and I are ready to answer your questions. Thank you 
for attention. 


“Daily World” correspondent (USA): Zionists in the USA 
are trying to link criticism of Israel with anti-Semitism. In par- 
ticular, their main target in this connection is the Soviet Union, 
and they are trying to portray the USSR as an anti-Semitic 
state. Would you comment on this, please? 


D. A. Dragunskiu: Such a device of Western, Zionist and 
pro-Zionist propaganda is typical of the system of misinforma- 
tion and the slander against the Soviet Union. It is well known 
that the Soviet people decisively oppose any form of chauvi- 
nism or nationalism and such nationalistic quirks as anti-Semi- 
tism or Zionism. 

The crimes of the Israeli military have aroused the indig- 
nation of honest people in all countries of the world—both 
Jews and non-Jews. There were even mass demonstrations in 
Israel itself. Are such protests also a manifestation of anti-Se- 
mitism? 


Allegations that the establishment of the Soviet Anti-Zioniy 
Committee is a manifestation of some sort of anti-Jewish pol. 
icy are absurd. The myth of the existence of a “Jewish ques. 
tion” in the USSR is in itself exploited in order to fortify the 
standard argument of the “eternalness of anti-Semitism” which, 
I would say, is one of the main supports of the ideology of Zi. 
onism. 

Our committee opposes the clouding of peoples’ minds and 
the attempts to cultivate national prejudices in the consciousness 
of individuals. Our struggle is therefore being waged in order 
to protect people from the revolting influence of Zionist infection. 


“Trud”’ (Labour) correspondent (USSR): How 1s the activ- 
ity of the Anti-Zionist Committee financed? 


M. B. Krupkin: The Committee is a public body and _ its 
finances will accordingly come from donations and __ subsidies 
from Soviet public organisations, scientific, artistic, cultural and 
educational establishments and associations, as well as from sub- 
scriptions from individuals. 


“Izvestia” (News) correspondent (USSR): I would like to 
ask you to explain in more detail, why it is at present that the 
fight with Zionism is becoming particularly acute. 


G. O Zimanas: The reactionary, aggressive line of Zionism 
is today to be seen more clearly and more distinctly than before. 
Zionism, which arose at the end of the last century as the ideology 
of the big Jewish bourgeoisie, has today become the official doc- 
trine of Israel and determines its aggressive policies in the Mid- 
dle East in the interests of American imperialism. The policy of 
Zionism—which is the real sponsor of the wars of aggression 
and the genocide in Sabra and Chatila—with its pathological 
hatred of everything Soviet, has inspired much loathing. The 
persistent and impertinent claims of Zionist radio saboteurs, 
who provocatively allege that almost all the two million Soviet 
Jews dream of nothing other than emigrating to Israel, and 
that the remaining 269 million citizens of the Soviet Union 
“oppress” and “persecute” them, provoke the indignation of 
the Soviet people. 


8 


Any form of nationalism is harmful and dangerous, whether 
‘+ js Zionism or anti-Semitism, German racism or the racist 
olicies of the white minority in the Republic of South Afri- 
ca. Any talk of the superiority of white, black and yellow peo- 
over all others is criminal, but it is particularly danger- 
ous for humanity when it becomes the official ideology of a 
racist regime which draws on the support of international 
imperialism and achieves its aims by force of arms, spilling 
the blood of innocent people. 

The Zionists do not like the fact that all Soviet citizens, 
‘ncluding Soviet Jews love their Motherland and the Soviet 
system, which was attained in October 1917 and defended 
during the Great Patriotic War at the price of the lives of 20 
million of the sons and daughters of our peoples. They hate 
the Soviet Union, which hinders the implementation of their 
plans, and it is here that we find the reason for the incompat- 
ibility of Zionism with Soviet patriotism and the internation- 
alism of Soviet citizens. 


ple 


“Golos Rodiny’ (Voice of the Motherland) correspondent 
(USSR): What can you say about the fall in the number of 
Jews emigrating from the USSR? 


“Los Angeles Times” correspondent (USA): Do you consid- 
er the desire of Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel or some 
other country equivalent to treachery? If so, why? 


S. L. Zivs: I will try to answer both these questions together. 
You see, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, we have for a long 
time been coming across the juggling of figures which is widely 
resorted to by Zionist propaganda. One minute they declare 
that 50,000 want to leave the Soviet Union, the next they say 
700,000. Not long ago I saw the figure of 383,528 in a book 
and remembered it. The question naturally arises of where 
these figures come from? They are not taken from a real num- 
ber of people who are applying or have applied to leave, but 
from figures planned by the Zionist, if one may say so, demo- 
graphers. Let us say they send out a hundred thousand sum- 
monses—it will soon be declared that a hundred thousand peo- 
ple wish to leave. How is this done? Summonses on the pre- 


9 


text of “uniting a family” are sent to people who have neye, 
had relatives in Israel, and still do not. They are sometime, 
even sent to Soviet citizens who do not even exist, or one per. 
son may receive several. In literally the few weeks our Commit. 
tee has been in the existence Soviet citizens have sent us let. 
ters full of indignation and enclosing such “official” summonses 
But in what respect are they official? They bear a red no. 
tary’s stamp and an accompanying letter from the Israel For. 
eign Ministry which talks of a humane attitude to the question 
of reunification and even refers to relatives who do not exist. 
That is one side of the affair. 

Another aspect is that we are well aware that of late, this 
year, and in the previous one, there has been a significant fall 
in the number of people leaving. I stress: a fall in the number 
of people applying to leave. 

For a number of years after the war, the main motive prompt- 
ing Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality to emigrate was that 
of reunification. You know that many Jewish families were 
split up during the war, and this has served as a basis for reun- 
ification applications. Reunification, however, has, on the whole, 
been completed, and the number of people leaving is there- 
fore naturally falling. | 

But I believe that, apart from that, the number of people is 
constantly decreasing who give in to the Zionist enticements, 
become victims of Zionist propaganda and leave our country. 

This is when slander begins to be introduced into Western 
pro-Zionist propaganda, as though the Soviet authorities are 
restricting exit from the country or suspending it. Someone even 
tried to link the significant drop in the number of people leav- 
ing with the creation of our Committee. I should add that the 
question of emigration is decided by competent state organs. 
Our Committee, of course, can only elucidate and help Soviet 
citizens to understand the mendacity and maliciousness of Zion- 
ist propaganda and try to protect them from it. 

I am talking about this particularly in connection with the 
fact that our Committee has already begun receiving letters 
full of anxiety, bitterness and despair from former Soviet citi- 
zens living abroad. 

I think it is worth quoting some of these letters. This is a 
letter we received from Lyubov Winkler, a former Soviet citi- 


10 


wen now living in West Berlin: “To my deeply respected and 
dear comrades who initiated the creation of the Anti-Zionist 
Committee! It was with great satisfaction that I read your ap- 

| in the Pravda. I congratulate you on the establishment 
of your Committee and hope you are successful in your 
work... I am a victim of Zionist propaganda, and for eleven 
years have been suifering beyond the frontiers of my beloved 
and only Soviet Motherland ... I am now 59 years old, a doc- 
tor... 1 have seen a lot and had a hard time both in Is- 
rael and here... I have seen the brutal face of Zionism... Grief 
and tears, suffering, humiliation, complete isolation and lone- 
liness in a loathsome, alien world. What has happened to 
me is the result of tricky Zionist propaganda. The Zionists in- 
terfered in my life and ruined it.” 

On the next letter, which is from Brooklyn, New York, you 
can see numerous postmarks. The letter reads: “Having given 
in to Zionist propaganda, we took a suicidal step... We were 
simply idiots, leaving our only Motherland without knowing 
what we were in for.” I will not read you all of this letter 
because it contains many bitter, very bitter pages. ““We are ex- 
tremely unhappy, we are in the very depths of hell’’—these are 
the sort of words used in this ‘etter, which is signed on behalf 
of several families. The writers express their certainty that “the 
Anti-Zionist Committee will defend Soviet Jews from the intrigues 
of Zionism and imperialism in general, and work in all fairness 
not to let people go, condemning them to misery.” 

You see, the question is one of permission to leave the Soviet 
Union being a condemnation of people to misery. 

In this note I have here with the second question, the word 
“treachery” is underlined. I think you have understood from my 
answer that when ‘a family is reunited, when a father is, indeed, 
reunited with the children from whom he was separated during 
the war, then there is no treachery. 

But when a person has fallen into the trap of Zionist propa- 
ganda, I would say as a lawyer that this is an unpatriotic deed 
which does not correspond to our moral principles or meet with 
the support of Soviet society or an absolute majority of Jewish 
citizens of our country. 


“Sovetskaya Rossiya” (Soviet Russia) correspondent: Do rep- 


11 


resentatives of the various nationalities take part in the Ant. 
Zionist Committee’s work? 

V. V. Pushkarev: There was a call to citizens of the varioys 
nationalities to take part in the Committee’s work in the appeal] 
to the Soviet public, and many people responded to it. The con. 
stituent assembly elected Russians, Jews, Ukrainians and repre- 
sentatives of other nationalities to the Committee. It is the jn- 
ternational duty of all good-will people to unmask Zionism, its 
ideology of nationalism and chauvinism, and the practice of 
robbery and genocide of Israel’s ruling circles in the Middle East. 

The following make up the Anti-Zionist Committee: M. JI, 
Kabachnik and T. I. Oizerman, who are prominent scientists 
and academicians of our country, and V. N. Kudryavtsev, who 
is a corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences; 
the prominent cultural figures of M. I. Blanter and A. O. Ste- 
panova, who are both People’s Artists of the USSR and both 
hold the Hero of Socialist Labour title; T. M. Lioznova, who is 
a film director and holds the State prize; representatives of la- 
bour collectives from Moscow and the surrounding area—Hero 
of Socialist Labour A. K. Marinich, the chairman of the “22nd 
Congress of the GPSU”’ collective farm in the Kolomensky region 
and Hero of Socialist Labour G. P. Golubeva, a poultry far- 
mer at the Bratsevskii poultry combine. The famous writers H. 
Hoffman, Ts. Solodar, and Yu. Kolesnikov, and the poets A. 
Vergelis and A. Dementyev are also members of the Committee. 


Radio Peace and Progress correspondent (USSR): The alle- 
gation of discrimination against Soviet Jews in education and 
science was one of the recurrent themes at the provocative gath- 
ering “in defence of Soviet Jews” that took place in March of 
this year in Jerusalem. What can you say in this connection? 


M.I. Kabachnik: Zionist propaganda is invariably notable 
for its brazeness and has not stopped at its flagrant juggling of 
facts. I would begin by pointing out that here in the Soviet 
Union we have a system of general secondary education which is 
obligatory for all children, irrespective of their nationality, sex 
or material position. All children, including Jews, receive an 
education. This means that there cannot possibly be any dis- 
crimination in this field. If we move on to the next stages of 


12 


education, that is, to secondary technical and higher education, 
what discrimination are we talking about if Soviet Jews hold 
one of the highest places in the Soviet Union amongst other 
nationalities in terms of their level of education? Further, we 
can boldly assert that in such terms Soviet Jews stand above 
those in all other countries. 

Let us take the highest level. There is among the prominent 
Soviet scientists a significant number of Jews who have been 
elected to the Academy of Sciences, the country’s highest sci- 
entific body. And it has been like that throughout the years of 
Soviet power. I remember how A. F. Yoffe, an outstanding 
physicist and head of the Soviet School of Physics, was chosen 
as an academic in 1920, and soon after that A. N. Frumkin, 
the head of the Soviet school of electrochemistry and a brilliant 
scientist whose name was known around the world, was also 
elected, as well as a whole host of others. I can list a great num- 
ber of postwar names—for instance, the physicist V. L. Ginz- 
burg, the crystallographer B. K. Vainstein, the physicist I. M. 
Frank and his biophysicist brother G. M. Frank, the biochem- 
ist A.S. Braunstein, and the physicist A.B. Migdal. I could 
continue this list. Apart from that the academicians Ya. B. 
Zeldovich and Yu. B. Khariton have each three times been 
awarded the Hero of Socialist Labour title. And Zionist propa- 
ganda calls all this discrimination! This also applies to profes- 
sors and lecturers in higher educational establishments and tech- 
nical colleges. Thus, talk of discrimination against Jews in 
education is, to put it bluntly, a provocative invention of Zion- 
ist propaganda. 


Cable News Network correspondent (USA): The state of 
Israel has a right to exist. Any government which practices 
policies similar to those of the Nazis must not have this right. 
Will your Committee call on the Soviet government to change 
its policy towards the state of Israel or will you call on 
the government to support those elements in the Arab world 
which believe that the state of Israel should not exist? 


S.L. Zivs: If I have correctly understood your question, 
it looks like this: we are talking today about the fact that the 
Israeli government is adopting the very methods which were 


13 


used by the Nazis. Moreover, the official opinion of the Sp. 
viet government, which is repeatedly expressed, is that the 
state of Israel does have the right to exist, but that, if it j, 
a Nazi state, it does not enjoy this right. Have I understoog 
you correctly? However, let us split up the two parts of 
the question. Ever since the creation of the state of Israel, 
A. A. Gromyko, the USSR Minister for Foreign Affairs, has 
stressed the official point of view of the Soviet government 
from the tribune of the UN and very recently at a press con. 
ference held in this building. This point of view is upheld by 
the whole of Soviet public opinion. Yes, the state of Israel 
does have the right to exist. 

We are also talking about the fact that the ruling circles 
of Israel and the Israeli military have committed and are con- 
tinuing to commit the same crimes as were committed by the 
Nazis in their time. This is particularly borne out by the barbar- 
ic aggression against Lebanon. Is there really no coincidence 
between the methods and devices now being used by the Be- 
gin government and those of the Nazis who tried to obtain Le- 
bensraum for themselves? 

The international commissions comprising the bishop of 
Stockholm, Queen’s Counsel John Platts-Mills from Britain, and 
the Belgian professor Paulette Pierson-Mathy, which repeatedly 
carried out investigations, came to the conclusion that the crimes 
of the Israeli military are analogous with those of the Na- 
zis. The question also repeatedly arose of the accountability of 
those who inspired and those who committed these crimes. 

We are not talking about the dissolution of Israel, but about 
the accountability of its ruling circles and the cessation of its 
aggressive, expansionist policy, which is threatening peace in 
the Middle East and runs contrary to the interests of Israelis 
themselves. 


I. P. Belyaev: In your question you make it sound as though 
the Soviet Union supports Israel’s right to exist in words only, 
and that in practice it supports those Arab circles which oppose 
the existence of the state of Israel. This is mot true. It was 
at the very same press conference and in the very same decla- 
ration that A. A. Gromyko stressed that the Soviet Union does 


14 


not support those extremist Arab circles which oppose the 
existence of the Israeli state. 


Radio Moscow correspondent: Will the letters which the 
Anti-Zionist Committee has received be published? 


M. B. Krupkin: We have received a large quantity of let- 
ters, some of which were printed in Izvestia a few days ago. 
We have included some of the comments—and I emphasise 
only a small part of them—in a pamphlet entitled The Soviet 


People Offer Their Support. 


UPI correspondent (USA): What can you say about the 


current role of the Jewish Autonomous Region and its centre 
Birobidzhan? 


I. P. Belyaev: We can speak about the successful creation 
and development of the Jewish Autonomous Region in the 
Khabarovsk Territory in the Eastern part of the Soviet Union. 
It will be useful for the participants in the press conference 
to know that, in the nearly half century of its existence, not 
one person of Jewish nationality has emigrated from here to 


Israel. 


G. O. Zimanas: I was in the Jewish Autonomous Region 
with a group of colleagues not very long ago. The main impres- 
sion I formed was of the attitude of friendship and_brother- 
hood between the Jews and the non-Jews. The first secretary 
of the Regional Party Committee is a Jew by nationality, as 
are the directors of many enterprises. The notices in all offi- 
cial establishments are in both Russian and Yiddish. 

The population of the region forms a unified family, and the 
region can be proud not only of economic successes, but also 
of achievements in the sphere of culture. It has a Jewish 
theatre which often tours other towns of the Soviet Union, in- 
cluding Moscow. 


Danish TV correspondent: As I understand, you maintain 
that anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism are two different concepts, 
but do you deny that anti-Zionism can be used as a convenient 
cover for anti-Semitism? 


15 


S. L. Zivs: In the course of today’s conference we have a4). 
ready repeated, and we are ready to repeat time and again 
that all Soviet people and the whole of Soviet society decisive. 
ly and categorically oppose chauvinism, nationalism, and any 
national quirks, both anti-Semitism and Zionism. You know 
perfectly well that Zionist propaganda will try to declare any 
speech against both the ideology and political practice of Zion- 
ism as anti-Semitism. 


“Komsomolskaya Pravda’ correspondent (USSR): In con- 
nection with some of the details which have surfaced from the 
case of the Hitlerite butcher Klaus Barbie, I would like to 
know if you know of any facts linking the Nazi criminals and 
the Zionists. 


Yu. A. Kolesnikov: Of, course. I shall tell you about them. 
I managed to get deep behind the German lines, where I had 
been sent by the Soviet command. I saw what was going on 
on the territory occupied by the Nazis. 

Adolf Hitler had given his SS Gruppenfihrers and Gaulei- 
ters, his generals and other butchers an extremely laconic but 
capacious directive: just one Jew was to remain—but only as 
an exhibit. It should be pointed out that the Nazi butchers 
precisely, methodically and scrupulously fulfilled this diaboli- 
cal order of their Fuhrer’s. 

I want at this point to observe that throughout the war the 
Soviet command gave priority attention to saving people of 
any nationality and denomination, including Jews, from the 
destruction threatening them in fascist captivity. Our courageous 
underground fighters and partisans saved miserable people, 
hid them in safe places, or led them into the woods, often 
paying for this with their lives. 

And, in that unbelievably difficult time, when honest peo- 
ple the world over wondered how to quicken victory over the 
“brown plague” and save humanity from Nazism, the leaders 
of international Zionism, who had conferred on themselves the 
right to be called the “defenders of Jews”, were, in fact, by no 
means engaged in the defence of Jews. They were not worried 
about the fate of their fellow-tribesmen languishing and dying 
in Hitler’s death camps. The bosses of Zionism were preoccu- 


16 


‘ed only with the numerical preponderance of Jews over the 
Arab population of Palestine. And this was at a time when it 
was already well known how Nazism was “solving the Jewish 
roblem”. ‘hat is why the actions of the leaders of internation- 
,| Zionism are nailed to the shameful pillar of the history of 
the Second World War. 

These are the reasons why we are today Justified in returning 
such a harsh and severe verdict on Zionism. And this will be 
absolutely correct, perfectly objective, and unconditionally fair, 
for at that terrible time, international Zionist figures not only 
did not defend Jews but, on the contrary, they betrayed them, 
striking bargains with the chiefs of the Gestapo and the Ss. 

The “Palestinian office”, which used to operate in Berlin, the 
capital of the Third Reich, is evidence of this. This office was 
headed by Levi Eshkol, one of the leaders of international Zion- 
ism and who subsequently became Prime Minister of Israel. 

It was Eshkol and his myrmidons who were engaged in sav- 
ing the rich Jews who had been of “particular service ” to Zion- 
ism from the SS bosses. A wealth of facts is known of how 
Eshkol’s office even refused help to rich Jews simply because 
they did not share the Zionists’ point of view. ‘Thus, 
these people, like many tens, hundreds of thousands of Jews 
and non-Jews were doomed to certain death in Hitler’s in- 
cinerators. 

Moreover, the “Palestinian office’ co-operated directly 
with the head of the Fourth department of the Reich Securi- 
ty Head Office and the notorious Obersturmbannfuhrer of the 
SS, Adolf Eichmann. This co-operation brought both sides con- 
siderable “fruits”. In connection with this it is appropriate to 
remember the noisy case of Rudolf Kastner, well-known in 
Israel and beyond its frontiers in its time. This Zionist emis- 
sary of the “Action Committee” with “extensive authority” had 
not only “business” but also, I would say, warm relations with 
Adolf Eichmann. 

It was not by accident that after the Second World War the 
Zionist sleuths were eager to trace the former Obersturmbann- 
fuhrer so that, God forbid, he should not be caught by repre- 
sentatives of some other country and the concealed secrets of 
the Zionists’ alliance with the Nazis become the property of the 
whole of world public opinion. Incidentally, something of the sort was about to happen 
The exterminated people of various nationalities from many 
countries, including Soviet citizens, and, of course, prisoners of 
war murdered in the Nazi camps are all on the conscience of 
this Hitlerite butcher. 

It is also typical that the Israeli rulers have not, as yet, ad. 
ded their voice to the demands for the extradition and punish. 
ment of Nazj criminals who have found refuge in the Unit. 
ed States of America. 

It’s like a proverbial saying—tell me who you're defending 
and Ill know who you are. 

I think it is clear to everyone who is who. The facts I have 
cited are far from a complete answer to the question but | 
think we shall have another opportunity to continue this con- 
versation. 


Novosti Press Agency (APN) correspondent: Do Zionist 
doctrines influence Israeli foreign policy? 


I. P. Belyaev: Undoubtedly, they do. In fact, they not only 
influence it, they determine it. I would remind you that Israel 
has existed for a little over 37 years and that in this truly short 
historical period, the Israeli state has been at war six times! 

Here it is precisely Zionist doctrines—including the doctrine 
of Greater Israel from the Nile to the Euphrates—which 
play the decisive role in determining Israel’s policy, both in the 
occupied Arab territories, and in relation to their neighbours. 

The theory has begun to be circulated about a Jewish home- 
land which existed in ancient times and which it is now essenti- 
al to resurrect, this theory also speaks about the “historic right” 
by which the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were declared “lib- 
erated areas” and a whole people—the Palestinian Arabs—was 
denied national legal rights. All this had one single purpose—to 
justify the annexation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. 
Begin thinks it is only a matter of time. 

And if we are to talk of other Zionist theories, their main 
point is that the map of the Middle East must be redrawn, mean- 
ing that Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and even Egypt should be divided 
up into small formations. Begin and his government also op- 
pose defining the state frontiers of Israel, saying that they do 


18 


not naturally exist. According to the plan of a “Greater Isra- 
el’, the frontiers must be movable and be established subject 
to further territorial expansion. 

Our Committee’s declaration concerning the Lebanese-Israeli 
agreement was published in the press on May 17th. It stressed 
the crushing terms of the agreement which was foisted on 
Lebanon by Israel and the USA. In our opinion, this agree- 
ment is nothing more than a smoke screen set up to hide the 
true goals of Israeli policy. We are talking of preparation for 
4 new war against the Arabs. 


“Al-Watan” correspondent (Kuwait): What is your attitude 
to the just struggle of the Palestinian Arabs under the guidance 
of the PLO for the creation of a democratic Palestinian Arab 
state? My second question is, how do you view Ronald Rea- 
gan’s so-called peace plan? 


I. P. Belyaev: I don’t think there is any need to give a 
verbose reply to the first question. The Soviet Union has al- 
ways supported the just struggle of the Arab people of Pales- 
tine for their national rights and the creation of a Palestinian 
Arab state. We have always believed that the United Nations 
resolution adopted on November 29th, 1947 constitutes the 
legal basis for the creation of such a state. This resolution es- 
tablished the need to partition the previously mandated ter- 
ritory of Palestine into two states—an Arab one, which was 
indicated in the first line, and a Jewish one. The Jewish state 
appeared on May 14th, 1948, but the Palestinian Arab state 
was never created. It does not follow from this, however, 
that the Palestinian Arabs have lost their right to it. We have 
active relations with the PLO. The principal position of the 
USSR is set out in the corresponding documents, and we re- 
gard the PLO as the sole legal representative of the Palestini- 
an people. 

As for the second question, the Reagan peace plan, as is 
well known, refers to some association of the West Bank with 
Jordan, but the plan itself does not explain what sort of asso- 
ciation this is to be and the cardinal problem of the Middle 
Fast conflict—that of the Palestinians—is circumvented. And, 
as it seems to me, this plan, which was advanced on September 


2 19 


ist last year at the height of the war in Lebanon, pursued the 
end of diverting attention from the aggression and crimes of 
Israel in Lebanon, and in no way sought a comprehensive and 
just regulation of the conflict. As for the “strategic agreement” 
between the United States and Israel, this is the actual union, 
on the basis of which Israel and the United States in essence 
jointly made war in Lebanon and are now preparing for a 
new war against Syria. 


“Daily World” correspondent: General MDragunskii! You 
know from personal experience what role was played by Soviet 
Jews in the Great Patriotic War and the role of the Soviet Ar- 
my in saving millions of Jews from death in the gas chambers, 
Please tell us about this. 


D. A, Dragunski: Jews fought in the united multinational 
Red Army against Hitler’s hordes. Around 200,000 Jews fell 
bravely at the fronts of the war, and the heroic military feats 
of many thousands of Jewish warriors have been recognised by 
the conferment of medals. More than 120 people are worthy 
of a title of Hero of the Soviet Union. People in the Soviet 
Union faithfully honour the heroic military deeds performed in 
the years of the Great Patriotic War. 

I myself entered the war in the Osovets fortress, and I saw 
many fronts during its 1418 gruelling days and nights. There 
were representatives of about 30 nationalities in the brigade I com- 
manded at the end of the war, and they were all fighting for our 
Motherland. They didn’t ask who you were—a Russian, a Ka- 
zakh, Jew or Lett. They had one task—quickly to do away 
with racism and fascism, and win freedom for our Motherland. 
We fought and gained victory as a united multinational family 
of the Soviet peoples. 

I would also like to remind you that every year on May 9th, 
we celebrate Victory Day. This day is officially celebrated in 
many countries—but not in Israel. 

In Israel, such a great historic event as the victory over Na- 
zi Germany, the routing of fascism, is not celebrated as a state 
holiday. The pathological hatred of the Zionist bosses for the 
Soviet Union prevents them from recognising the worldwide and 
historic contribution of the USSR to the achievement of Vic- 


20 


tory; which averted the realisation of the Nazis’ barbaric plans 
to exterminate all so-called “lower races”, including the Jews. 


“%o Haderech” (the organ of the Communist Party of Isra- 
el) correspondent: How does the Committee plan to work and 
will it announce a concrete programme? Secondly, I know 
that Comrade Belyaev recently returned from Israel, where he 
attended Victory Day celebrations. Perhaps he will say a few 


words for us. 


M. B. Krupkin: I shall answer the first question. A few days 
ago the Presidium of the Committee approved a plan of work 
which above all envisages various measures aimed at the expo- 
sure of Zionism and the devices of imperialism. This plan takes 
into account various suggestions contained in letters received 
by the Committee. 


I. P. Belyaev: It was in a small delegation of just three peo- 
ple that I took part in the celebrations in Israel of the 38th 
anniversary of Victory over Nazi Germany. I would like immed- 
jately to stress that this was not an official event. It was or- 
ganised by the progressive forces of Israel and, incidentally, 
has become traditional in that country. 

Despite the official position of the ruling circles, more than 
10,000 people gathered in the Red Army wood near Jerusalem. 
The first part of the holiday is the laying of flowers at a mod- 
est memorial to those who fell in the Second World War, 
and the second part is a solemn meeting. This holiday was a 
witness to the fact that there are forces in Israel which hold 
that people must keep in their memory the tragic events of the 
war and should never allow new military conflicts in 
current conditions. This holiday was a _ protest against 
both the war with Lebanon and against the plans to unleash 
a war with Syria, about which official Israel was already talk- 
ing very loudly at that time. 

To touch on the speeches made at that meeting, I would say 
that the most significant thing was probably that in all of them 
the idea was pierced that crimes like those perpetrated by the 
Nazi in the Second World War must not be repeated. It was 
also very interesting for me to observe that both Jews and Arabs 


21 


took part in the meeting. It seems to me that this celebration 
was also a demonstration that Jews and Arabs in the Middle 
East can live peacefully together. 

This was a meeting aimed against the doctrines which today 
are nourishing those in Israel who favour a new war with Sy. 
ria, attacking Jordan, and redrawing the political map of the 
Middle East. 


Radio Moscow correspondent: Zionist propaganda is trying 
to convince its Western audience that citizens of Jewish nation- 
ality are being encrouched upon in the Soviet Union. Please 
comment on this. 


S. L. Zivs: The attempt to stir up the “Jewish question” in 
the USSR is an element of the “psychological war” against our 
country. In connection with this, I would like to draw your at- 
tention to the fact that the Western press is systematically de- 
luged with slander about discrimination against Jews in the So- 
viet Union. Books regularly come out which are specially ded- 
icated to this question. Here I have two such books which were 
published in France. One is called Anti-Semitism in Russia 
from Its Sources to Our Days, and the other To Be a Jew in 
the U.S.S.R. Both were released by the prestigious and, | 
would say, academic University Press publishing house. 

If you turn through the pages of To Be a Jew in the US.S.R., 
you can find figures, tables, calculations and footnotes but not 
the truth. Let us turn to, say, page 86. It speaks of how the 
teaching of religion to very young children is punishable even 
with the death sentence, in accordance with Article 119 of the 
Criminal Code. See for yourselves what Article 119 of the 
RSFSR Criminal Code says. It speaks of the punishment for 
having sexual intercourse with juveniles. 

Let us look further. Here it speaks of how the Collected 
Works by V. I. Lenin were republished in 1964 and that his 
1919 speech aimed against anti-Semitism was not included be- 
cause of the wish not to remind people of this. But take the 
38th volume of the Collected Works by V. I. Lenin, and read 
the text of this speech. In it he explains who is kindling hos- 
tility to the Jews—the capitalists of all countries, who are inter- 
ested in diverting the attention of the workers of all nationa- 
lities from their real enemies in this way. 


22 


Here are a few more examples. The author claims that all 
plays running 1n Moscow theatres have an anti-Semitic direc- 
tion. Here, references are given. I think that even the foreign 
journalists have seen the production of Mikhail Bulgakov’s 
lay The Race, which has even been made into a film. This 
dramatic work, which paints a broad picture of the retreat of 
ihe routed White Guard bands from the Crimea and_ their 
flight to Constantinople, is declared anti-Semitic on the grounds 
that the insignificant character of Artur Arturovich, the 
cockroach king, organises cockroach races in Constantinople 
and it is possible to judge from one of the comments that he 
isa Jew. 

In this same book we read that for more than half a century, 
not one single edition has come out in the USSR of the Bible in 
Hebrew. In fact, this it is, published in 1979, the Old Testa- 
ment—the Five Books of Moses, in Hebrew and with a paral- 
lel Russian text. It was published by the Religious Society of 
the Moscow Choral Synagogue. 


“Neues Leben” correspondent: The allegation often ap- 
pears in the Western press that in the Soviet Union the teaching 
of Hebrew is forbidden. At the same time Hebrew is called the 
national language of Jews in the USSR. What is the actual sit- 
uation? 


G. O. Zimanas: Hebrew was never the national lan- 
guage of people of Jewish nationality, neither in Tsarist Rus- 
sia, nor in the Soviet Union. That language was Yiddish. At 
present, around 14 per cent of Jews in the Soviet Union con- 
sider Yiddish their mother tongue. As for Hebrew, which in Is- 
rael has been resurrected and adapted to modern conditions, 
this language is taught in Soviet higher education establishments 
where specialists such as philologists and orientalists are trained. 
For instance, in the Asian and African Institute at the Moscow 
State University, and the Tbilisi and Leningrad universities. 

I will not dwell on the fact that the Zionist leaders are bank- 
ing heavily on the introduction of Hebrew. They would like 
to see Hebrew taught and adopted as a common _ language 
for the unified “world Jewish nation” which they promote. 
Hebrew also appears to the leaders of Zionism as an instru- 


23 


ment which must simplify the spreading of Zionist ideolo 

But let us return to Yiddish. I can assert with all respon. 
sibility that the Zionist impostors—the “defenders of Sovig, 
Jewish culture”’—are absolutely indifferent to the language of 
Yiddish, the national language of Soviet Jews. Tell me _ the 
name of any Western publishing house which would be read 
to publish books by Soviet Jewish writers writing in Yiddish 
or even an anthology of works printed in Yiddish in the mag. 
azine Sovetish Heimland, which comes our in Moscow. Tell 
me the name of a Western recording company which 1s ready 
to release records of Yiddish songs by Yosif Kobzon or Ga. 
lina Kareva. Name any leading Western newspaper from Le 
Monde to The New York Times which would write about the 
beautiful Yiddish primer which has been approved by the edv- 
cation department of the Jewish Autonomous Region and pub. 
lished by the Khabarovsk publishing house in 1982. 

Why is all this passed over in silence? Because one has only 
to write about this for the real meaning of the “defence of Jew- 
ish culture in the USSR” to become absolutely clear to any 
person in the West. 


“La Revue des relations internationales’ correspondent 
(Belgium): In Belgium there are Jewish figures, particularly 
among university teachers, who take part in the unmasking of 
Israel and Zionism. Of course, they work under extremely hard 
conditions and are under the pressure of Zionist propaganda. 
My question is this: does your Committee envisage co-operation 
with Jewish figures of anti-Zionist persuasion in other countries? 


S. L. Zivs: I think that, in the course of its future work our 
Committee will establish links with foreign national and inter- 
national organisations which support the exposure of Zionism 
and its ideology and political practice. 


Editor of “Politiken” (Denmark): You assert that you and 
your Committee support the existence of the state of Israel, but 
it is known that the ideological basis of the Israeli state is Zion- 
ism. How can one fight Zionism and, at the same time, defend 
the existence of the state of Israel? 


24 


s. L. Zivs: 1 think you know our fundamental position per- 
fectly well: we are in favour of developing normal relations 
with states where the ruling circles and dominant parties hold 
‘deological positions which are unacceptable to us. But I would 
not like to say that we are at the present time ready to extend 
such an approach to Israel, for its government holds positions 
of military adventurism, aggression, racism and expansion. 


“Moscow News’ correspondent: A tendency has recently been 
noticed for immigration to the “Promised Land” to fall. In 
Israel itself, a growth in the desire to emigrate is being observed. 
Does this not bear witness to the crisis of Zionism? 


S. L. Zivs: I think we could talk not only of the crisis of 
Zionism, but rather of the downfall of one of its main concep- 
tions—‘‘the gathering in the land of Israel of all the world’s 
Jews”. What is happening in practice? In all the years of its 
existence, roughly one and a half million people have moved 
permanently to this state from around the world. And roughly 
600,000, i.e., one third, have left it, simply fled. What is this, 
if it is not a new “exodus”! 

The incredible growth of inflation is also one of the reasons 
prompting people to leave Israel. It stood at 135 per cent last 
year, a sort of record for capitalist countries. Other reasons in- 
clude the atmosphere of chauvinistic intoxication, the pressure 
of religious circles and, finally, the state of permanent war, 
when not one family knows which of its members will be lost 
during the next aggression. The Israeli parliament is at present 
discussing the question of sanctions against those who try to leave 
the country. I think this speaks more eloquently than any 
words about the Zionist myth, which has now crushed. 


AN INTERVIEW WITH 
D. A. DRAGUNSKII, 

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE 
SOVIET ANTI-ZIONIST 
COMMITTEE, PUBLISHED IN 
THE SOVETSKAYA 
KULTURA 

(SOVIET CULTURE) NEWSPAPER 
ON JUNE 2ist, 1983 


The creation of the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee pro. 
voked the usual fit of anti-Soviet hysteria in Washington, 
Setting the tone of this slanderous campaign, Ronald 
Reagan, the US Department of State and some congress. 
men made flagrant attacks on the Soviet Union and clum- 
sy attempts to pervert the essence of Lenin’s nationalities 
policy of the CPSU. They are trying to present the criti- 
cism of Zionism and the discussion by the Soviet public 
of Israel’s aggressive policy as an “anti-Semitic campaign” 
in the USSR. A, TASS correspondent asked Colonel-Gen- 
eral D. A. Dragunskii, the chairman of the Soviet An- 
ti-Zionist Committee and twice Hero of the Soviet Uni- 
on to state his opinion concerning the reaction of offici- 
al Washington to the Committee’s creation and its activ- 
ity. Here is his reply. 


Behind the malicious, surely following attacks from Washing- 
ton it is not difficult to discern the extreme irritation which 
has gripped the Zionist camp and its patrons. After all, our 
Committee, reflecting the will of the Soviet people, has set as 
its goal the all-round unmasking of the reactionary essence of 
Zionism, which concentrates in itself nationalist extremism, 
chauvinism and national intransigence, and embodies the cult 
of political adventurism and the permissibility of doing ev- 
erything, unrestrained demagogy and insolent sabotages, dirty ma- 
noeuvres and rare perfidy. It is by no means accidental that 
imperialism, headed by the USA, makes broad use of interna- 
tional Zionism as one of its strike detachments in its global 
strategy of attacks of socialism and the national liberation move- 
ment, and the forces of peace and social progress. This is 
why the setting-up of our fight with Zionism, its reactionary 
ideology and criminal practice provokes such obvious bitterness 


26 


- imperialism’s most aggressive circles, not to mention amongst 
the Zionist bosses. 

It is typical that the conductors of the bourgeois propagan- 
da orchestra are unable to think of anything new and merely 
repeat their own stock phrases, while keeping completely silent 
about the genuine motives for creating our Committee and its 
aims, which have been widely publicised in the Soviet and 
much of the foreign press. Thus, A. Romberg, the official rep- 
resentative of the Department of State, groundlessly accused the 
Soviet Union of “anti-Semitism”. But the ideology of Zionism 
and its advocates have resorted to such a dishonest device 
throughout the history of international Zionism, which in no 
way increases its persuasiveness. 

The attempts of the Zionist bosses and their Washington be- 
nefactors in the current administration to confer on them- 
selves the right to take the role of self-styled “defenders” of So- 
viet Jews provoke the deep indignation of the Soviet people. 
They resort to the most frenzied slander of our Soviet Mother- 
land, its history and present-day life, presently adulterating the 
nationalities policy of the Leninist party. The thousands of let- 
ters which we receive from all corners of the country are full 
of this indignation. 

The Soviet people—and this is proved by the entire his- 
tory of our multinational socialist state—are genuine internation- 
alists, and any forms of chauvinism are deeply alien to them, 
including Zionism and anti-Semitism. Of course, these prin- 
ciples also lie at the basis of our Committee’s work. 

The Zionists are drawing their “arguments”, if they may 
be called that and which are calculated to deceive the world 
public, from libels poisoned with the slander by all kinds of re- 
negades maintained by the American and Israeli special ser- 
vices. And, of course, genuine and widely available facts do not 
suit them, such as, for example, the ‘fact that in the Soviet 
Union, where Jews form 0.67 per cent of the population, there 
are more Jewish students studying in higher educational estab- 
lishments than there are in Israel. Thousands of Jews have been 
elected as deputies to Soviets and, just as people of other nation- 
alities, they occupy many responsible posts. 

However, the overseas slanderers have already been caught 
out more than once and we can only be surprised that in their 


27 


strive for political dividends, high-ranking figures in the curren) 
Washington administration time and again turn over the old 
worn-out record. Especially as if they are genuinely Worried 
about the “position of Jews”, the grounds for this worry coujq 
also be found in abundance and without difficulty not at th, 
other end of the world, but at home: there are more thay 
enough facts showing that arrant anti-Semitism is flourishing jy 
the United States itself. Indeed, it is flourishing doubly unde, 
the complete tolerance of the authorities. Discrimination in em. 
ployment, the existence of clubs to which Jews are barred ep. 
try, the burning and bombing of synagogues, the defilement of 
Jewish cemeteries, the daubing of swastikas on houses where 
Jews live, and the bashing of teenagers—all this has become 
the everyday way of life in America. As the newspaper U.S.4. 
Today testifies, the number of anti-Semitic demonstrations 
aimed against both individual citizens and Jewish organisations, 
has grown more than eightfold in the USA in the last three 
years. Last year, 947 such incidents were recorded. Things 
reached a point where even schoolchildren in Massachusetts 
formed an “organisation of Americans who hate Negroes and 
Jews”. Whoever gave the right to the authorities of a country 
permitting such savagery to take the role of moralists and preach 
to others how they should observe “human rights”? 

I would like to point out that particular irritation was pro- 
voked in the US State Department by the materials which were 
presented by our Committee at a recent press conference and 
corroborated the fact that the chauvinistic ideology of modern 
international Zionism and the criminal political practice of the 
ruling circles of Israel in point of fact constitute a repetition of 
the racist ideas and misanthropic acts of Nazis. Mr. Romberg 
considers such a parallel an extraordinary perversion of history 
and the truth. 

Pausing on the conscience of the representative of the US for- 
eign policy department his knowledge of history and opinion 
of the truth, I want to recall a well-known fact that someone 
in Washington would evidently like to remove from the memory 
of mankind. The evil deeds perpetrated by the Israeli military in 
Lebanon, which to this day continue in the occupied Arab lands 
and for which the Tel Aviv rulers and the leaders of internation- 
al Zionism bear direct responsibility, have provoked an explo- 


28 


jon of indignation and vexation the world over. The Prime Min- 
‘ter of Greece, Andreas Papandréou, called Israel a fascist 
state, and the London magazine Middle East International be- 
jeves the Israeli regime to be akin to the dictatorial fascist re- 
‘mes in Latin America. 

It is well known that voices are being heard ever more often 
‘n Israel itself which condemn the adventurist policy of the Is- 
raeli government. In reply to this, the persecution of democratic 
forces is becoming increasingly severe and merciless. The growth 
of progressive, democratic moods frightens Washington and Tel 
Aviv, as does the protest movement against the expansionist rul- 
ers of Israel. It 1s precisely for this reason that the overseas po- 
liticians are also trying to conceal the adventurism of Zionism 
and its roguish practice of attacking our Committee. 

But, just as you cannot sew a skull-cap from a pig’s tail, to 
use an expression of Sholem Aleichem, classic of Jewish lit- 
erature, so the Washington advocates who protect Zionism can- 
not hide its repulsive face by any exercises in libel. 


A MEETING WITH 
JOURNALISTS IN THE SOVIET 
ANTI-ZIONIST COMMITTEE 
ON JANUARY 19th, 1984 


S. Zivs: This meeting is dedicated to acquainting journalists with 
Soviet and foreign publications exposing Israel’s crimes against 
the Lebanese and the Palestinian Arabs, and, in the final analy. 
sis, crimes committed by the unbridled Zionists against Israeli 
citizens themselves. 


D. Dragunskii: The world public, including the Soviet people, 
is extremely worried by the planet’s hot spots. One of these is 
the Middle East, which is ever more often being called the “Bal- 
kans of the Third World War”. American imperialism is trying 
to establish its rule here by fire and sword, and it is precisely 
with this aim that Washington actively makes use of the aggres- 
siveness and expansionism of its strategic ally, Israel, allotting it 
the role of a battering ram to be used against the Arab national 
liberation movement. When it invaded Lebanon in the summer 
of 1982, the Israeli Zionist leadership openly declared its fun- 
damental goal as being to smash the Palestinian resistance move- 
ment and physically destroy its military formations. 

Today, Israel’s “longest” war in Lebanon continues. The USA 
took an active part both in its preparation and in the war itself. 
This is an obvious fact, which does not need any proof. Wash- 
ington and Tel Aviv are working hand in hand, and in recent 
weeks the situation in the Middle East has become even more 
explosive. Israel is developing plans for an aggression against 
Syria, and is not hiding its intention to annex the south of Le- 
banon. 

During the invasion of Lebanon the Israeli military used and 
today continues to use barbaric weapons which it obtained in 
plentiful supply from the USA before the offensive. It is suf- 


30 


ficient to mention the explosive devices which looked like toys. 
Even the Hitlerite fanatics did not think up such things. They 
were a barbaric “innovation” of Tel Aviv’s, whose victims were 
children, old men, and women. Actually, Israel is at war with 
the civilian Lebanese and Palestinian Arab population. 

The path of the aggressor in Lebanon is strewn with corpses. 
Wc only have to recall the Israeli artillery’s bombardment of 
West Beirut, the bloody slaughterhouse created by the aggressor 
and his assistants in the Palestinian refugee camps of Sabra and 
Chatila, and the Israeli air force’s very recent bombing of Baal- 
bek, which is a historical monument. 

I especially want to stress that the crimes of Israel in Leba- 
non have been perpetrated in conditions of a worsening of the 
worldwide situation such as have never been seen in the postwar 
period. In reply to a letter from the French anti-war movement 
Appeal of 100, Yuri Andropov justly emphasised that “the 
USA and those of its NATO partners which supported the de- 
ployment of new American missiles on European soil ... bear 
full responsibility for the situation which has taken shape”. 


S, Zivs: The American-Israeli aggression against Lebanon is 
a crime. There is a criminal—the Zionist leadership of Israel. 
There is also an accomplice to the crime—American imperial- 
ism, which takes the role of inspirer, organiser and executor. 
We can assert with full amenability that this is a crime against 
humanity. 

When the truth became known about what the aggressor was 
doing in Lebanon the world was horrified. The Second World 
War nightmares were revived in people’s memories of Khatyn, 
Oradour, Treblinka, Oswiecim, and Buchenwald. ,The world 
public reacted indignantly. 

Several international commissions were set up to investigate 
the crimes of the Israeli army in Lebanon, and accounts and 
materials of the commissions’ hearings on the work they did 
have been published. You have before you materials on the work 
of the International Commission of Inquiry into Israeli Crimes 
against the Lebanese and Palestinian Peoples, which was headed 
by the well-known English lawyer and Queen’s Counsel, John 
Platts-Mills. The booklet is entitled Accused of Crimes, and was 
published in Moscow in 1983 in Russian, English and French. 


31 


The second book is a report by the International Commission 
which was headed by the famous Irish politician Sean McBride, 
who holds the international Lenin prize “For Strengthening Peace 
Among the Peoples” and the Nobel Peace Prize. 

Truth is a direct victim of the Israel invasion of Lebanon 
Tel Aviv and its protectors from Washington are trying to fal. 
sify it. The publications which we have shown you are intended 
to restore it. The world must find out the truth. The actions of 
the Israeli army against the Palestinian and Lebanese civilian 
population during military operations can only be qualified as 
genocide. The mass extermination of the Palestinian Arabs in 
the Sabra and Chatila camps and the torture in the Ansar con- 
centration camp will remain forever in people’s memories as one 
of the most dreadful crimes against humanity. 

The international solidarity of honest people, journalists, pub- 
licists, and publishers in condemning Zionism manifested itself 
in the publication of a whole host of interesting books and col- 
lections of documents. Here is one of them—I witness. It was 
published in London in 1983 and gives the materials of 91 photo- 
graphic correspondents. The photograph album God Cried 
by Tony Clifton and Catherine Leroy was also published there. 
The Japanese journalist R. Khirokava released a photograph 
album which has become a denunciatory document of colossal 
force exposing the crimes of Israel. It is entitled From the Israeli 
Invasion to Murders in the Palestinian Camps of Sabra and 
Chatila, and was published in Tokyo in 1982. 

In January 1984, a new book came out in Rome 
dedicated to the tragedy which occurred in Lebanon. It 
is called Sabra and Chatila—Photographic Evidence of Geno- 
cide (R. Napoleone publishers), and is based on rich factual ma- 
terial and carries many photographs. 


APN correspondent: Gan you describe Israel’s system of 
crimes against Lebanon and the Palestinians in more detail? 


M. Krupkin: The war in Lebanon is justly called Israel’s most 
brutal war against the Arabs. Its awful peculiarity is that it is 
mainly being waged against the civilian population. It is enough 
to recall that 80 per cent of the victims in Lebanon, who are 
counted in thousands and thousands of dead and wounded, are 


32 


defenceless civilians, including a great many children, women 
and old men. 

As A. A. Gromyko, the USSR Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
noted in his speech at the Stockholm Conference on Confidence 
and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, 
“Militarism is always inhuman. This is now being seen particu- 
larly clearly in Lebanon.” 

Lebanon has been turned into a range for testing new types 
of American weapons. 

The Israeli aggression against Lebanon is a crime against peace 
and glaring infringement of international law. We are talking 
of barbaric mass murders of the civilian population—children, 
women and old men—and concentrated bombings and artillery 
shelling. The crimes of the Israeli aggressors fall completely into 
the category of the most heinous crime—genocide. 

By killing Lebanese and Palestinian Arabs the US Marines 
became accomplices to Israel’s genocide in Lebanon. As a mat- 
ter of fact, the Israeli aggression became an American-Israeli as- 
sault. 


TASS correspondent: Can the policy of genocide, which Israel 
is following, somehow influence the principal, initial positions 
for solving the Palestinian problem? 


I, Belyaev: There is only one solution to the Palestinian pro- 
blem—a fair one. This solution must be based on the UN Gen- 
eral Assembly resolution of November 29, 1947, which envisaged 
the creation of the sovereign national Arab state of Palestine 
side by side with Israel. Incidentally, the Arab state is named 
first in the text of the resolution. This means that the legal rights 
of the Arab Palestinian people, including their right to self-de- 
termination, must be realised alongside the creation of Israel. 

The Lebanese tragedy is not only a tragedy of the Lebanese 
and the Palestinian Arabs, but also of the Israelis. Tel Aviv’s 
adventurism in foreign policy is turning into a moral degradation 
of Israeli society. Honest Israelites do not want to remain on 
the sidelines in this difficult hour for their country, and are con- 
ducting an active struggle against their government’s policy in 
Lebanon. I would particularly like to point out the moves of 
Israeli soldiers and officers who refuse to serve in Lebanon and thus be the executors of the criminal plans of the Tel Aviv ry}. 
ers. 

I would also like to talk about one more fact on which Isra. 
eli politicians do not like to concentrate attention. As you remem. 
ber, in 1956, 1967 and 1982, the government of Israel Jjustifieg 
its expansionist course by the supposedly real threat to the very 
existence of the state of Israel and the necessity to guarantee 
the safety of Israeli citizens. 

What then is going on now? The Shamir government 1s show. 
ing criminal indifference to the death of Israeli soldiers in Le. 
banon. Young Israelites meet their death sent by criminal rulers 
so that criminal plans of aggression and expansion might be real- 
ised, and, in the fina] analysis, for the carrying through of Wash- 
ington’s imperial interests. 


Peace and Progress Radio correspondent: Is there any evi- 
dence of former Soviet citizens dying in Lebanon? 


S. Zivs: The fact that the Israeli government stubbornly hides 
its true losses in Lebanon has its own explanation. The Zion- 
ists urgently “invite” Jews from all over the world to resettle 
in Israel, but who will go there if he knows that Israeli poli- 
ticians have already prepared a piece of the “Promised Land” 
as a grave for this or that Jew? 

The Zionists have been conducting a single-minded campaign 
for many years, trying to persuade Jews in the USSR and other 
socialist countries to emigrate to Israel, where they promise them 
a truly “heavenly” existence in the “land of milk and honey”. 

In practice all these promises turn into fairly real prospect of 
death. Announcements appear in the Israeli press of the death 
of former Soviet citizens who gave in to the persuasion of Zion- 
ist propaganda and met their death in Lebanon. 

These announcements are more evidence of the tragic fate 
of people who, having given in to Zionist propaganda found 
themselves lured into the trap (in the most direct sense). They 
became willing or unwilling accomplices to the Israeli aggres- 
sion and met their death in Lebanon. 


KUNA Information Agency correspondent (Kuwait): Do you 
have Jewish national literature in the USSR? 


34 


Yu. Kolesntkov: Yes, we do. There are among Soviet Jewish 
men of letters authors who write in Yiddish. For example, Ilya 
Gordon, who published the book Under the Burning Sun in 
Yiddish. Like the works of all national literatures, books by 
ewish writers are translated into Russian and other languages 
of the USSR. In this way they exist in a single stream of mul- 
tinational Soviet literature. 

The magazine Sovetish Heimland is published in Yiddish in 
our country, and newspapers, magazines and books come out in 
Yiddish in the Jewish Autonomous Region, which will widely 
celebrate its 50th anniversary in 1984. The same should be said 
about the theatres which put on productions of the classics and 
of works by modern Soviet dramatists in Yiddish. 


“Washington Post” correspondent: Why was the Soviet Anti- 
Zionist Committee only founded a year ago? 


S. Zivs: It is well known that Soviet public opinion has al- 
ways had a negative attitude to Zionism, its ideology and polit- 
ical practice. International Zionism has recently ever more ac- 
tively been taking part in the anti-Soviet and anti-communist 
subversive activity of imperialism. Various Zionist organisations 
have increased their interference in the internal affairs of the 
Soviet Union, trying to undermine the national unity of the Soviet 
people. Further, the ideology and political practice of the rul- 
ing circles of Israel and international Zionism have recently 
become particularly dangerous and are actively being used to 
worsen the international situation the world over. The escalation 
of the danger which Zionism bears to peace is one of the rea- 
sons which led to the creation of our Committee. 


D. Dragunski: I would like to add that the policy of the rul- 
ing circles of Israel in the Middle East is taking on an ever more 
fascist nature. We have always been against Israel’s wars of 
aggression in the Middle East, but the escalation of the Israeli 
expansionist policy and its increasing fascist nature have result- 
ed in Soviet public opinion deeming it necessary to step up its 
anti-Zionist struggle. 


g8* 


S. Rokotov 


ZIONISM IN THE FIGHT 
AGAINST SOCIALISM 
AND DETENTE 


A LITTLE BIT OF HISTORY 


From the moment Zionism came into the political arena the 
leaders of its organisations offered their services to the ruling 
circles of the imperialist powers in the fight against the revolu. 
tionary movement. First Theodor Herzl, then Chaim Weiz. 
mann, who replaced him as president of the World Zionist 
Organization, Justice Louis D. Brandeis of the US Supreme 
Court, and other Zionist figures proved to their imperialist 
patrons that Zionism was the most effective weapon for the fight 
with progressive tendencies amongst the Jewish population. Dur- 
ing the First World War the Zionists offered their services both 
to the leaders of the Entente and to the German government 
in exchange for support for Zionist plans in Palestine. The work 
of the World Zionist Organisation received official blessing 
from the ruling circles of Great Britain, of which the Balfour 
Declaration is evidence. This declaration of the British Foreign 
Secretary contained a promise to further “...the establishment 
in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people”.’’ It 
was not by accident that the Balfour Declaration was released 
on November 2nd, 1917. With its help the British imperialists 
were banking not only on guaranteeing a pretext for the occupa- 
tion of Palestine, but also on bringing pressure to bear on the 
situation in revolutionary Russia. 

Anti-Semitism, which had become widespread in the ruling 
circles of Britain and other imperialist countries, facilitated the 
spreading of mythical ideas that the revolution in Russia was the 
result of a “Jewish conspiracy”. Moreover, on the eve of the 
Great October Socialist Revolution, some Western political lead- 
ers were cultivating the nonsensical illusions that a deal with the 
Zionists would enable them to avert the downfall of the Provi- 
sional Government. The British Foreign Office and its represen- 


86 


tatives 1n Petrograd groundlessly demonstrated the need for rapid 
action to attract the Jewish population of Russia to the side of 
the Entente and counterrevolution. As the British historian 
Christopher Sykes notes, before the Balfour Declaration “... it 
was believed that open British support of Zionism would detach 
Russian Jews from the Bolshevik party and so ensure that the 
Revolution would remain not only moderate but the belligerent 
ally of France and Britain”.” 

As early as November 3rd, 1917, a Foreign Office representa- 
tive had discussed measures for the fight with Bolshevism with 
Zionist leaders. In order to divert the Jewish masses from partic- 
jpating in the revolutionary movement, it was decided to send 
Nahum Sokolow, Vladimir Jabotinsky and Yehiel Tchlenow, 
the leaders of the World Zionist Organisation, and Chaim Weiz- 
mann, the main lobbyist of the Balfour Declaration, to Russia. 
Showing complete ignorance of the causes of the revolution, 
Lord Hardinge, the Permanent Under Secretary of State for 


Foreign Affairs, declared that by “...skilful management of 
the Jews in Russia the situation may still be restored by the 
spring’’.* 


Winston Churchill, the inspirer of the “fourteen powers’ cam- 
paign” against Soviet Russia openly declared Zionism a way of 
combatting the “international Bolshevik-Jewish conspiracy’’. Pro- 
ceeding from anti-communist and anti-Semitic premises, he said 
of Zionism: “... [the] schemes of a worldwide communistic 
State under Jewish domination are directly thwarted and hindered 
by this new ideal, which directs the energies and the hopes of 
Jews in every land towards a simpler, a truer, and a far more 
attainable goal. The struggle which is now beginning between 
the Zionist and Bolshevik Jews is little less than a struggle for the 
soul of the Jewish people. . .”° 

The following document can serve as a graphic illustration of 
how imperialist circles strengthened Zionism: 

“Strictly Confidential: Memorandum of Interview in Mr. 
Balfour’s apartment, 23 Rue Nitot, on Tuesday, June 24, 1919, 
at 4:49 p.m. 

“Present: Mr. Balfour, Mr. Justice Brandeis, Lord Eustace 
Percy and Mr. Frankfurter. ... 

“He [Brandeis] narrated his own approach to Zionism, that he 
came to it wholly as an American, for his whole life had been 


37 


free from Jewish contacts or traditions. As an American he Was 
confronted with the disposition of the vast numbers of Jews, par. 
ticularly Russian Jews, that were pouring into the United States 
year by year. It was then that by chance a pamphlet of Zionism, 
came his way and led him to the study of the Jewish problem 
and to the conviction that Zionism was the answer. The ve 
same men, with the same qualities that are now enlisted in revo. 
lutionary movement would find, and in the United States qo 
find, constructive channels for expression and make POsitive 
contributions to civilisation. 

“Mr. Balfour interrupted to express his agreement, adding— 
‘Of course these are the reasons that make you and me such 
ardent Zionists’.’’® 

We can judge what was meant by “constructive channels”, 
for example, from the memoirs of Jacob de Haas. A Zionist, de 
Haas began his career as the secretary of Theodor Herzl, and 
was then the closest assistant of Louis D. Brandeis, the leader of 
the American Zionists, for many years. He wrote: “The great 
strength of the American Zionist organisation was in the multi- 
fariousness of its contacts, and in the accurate knowledge of 
those in control of the human resources on which they could 
depend. Did the British need to obtain a contact in Odessa, or 
were they in need of a trustworthy agent in Harbin? 

“Did President Wilson require at short notice a thousand- 
word summary detailing those who were in the Kerensky upheav- 
al in Russia? The New York office rendered all these ser- 
vices. ..”.” 

During the period of the socialist revolution, eighteen various 
Zionist parties and organisations were operating in Russia, which 
as a rule had contacts with foreign centres in capitalist coun- 
tries. Having taken the position of supporting the bourgeois 
Provisional Government, they actively fought against the estab- 
lishment of Soviet power, and during the Civil War they closed 
ranks with the forces of counterrevolution. 

Having failed to secure a mass social base and the political 
support of working Jews, Zionist organisations in Soviet Russia 
collapsed, and in these conditions the centres of Zionism banked 
on subversive activities against Soviet power. 

As early as the 1920s, the bourgeois nationalist leaders of 
Jewish communities in the USA and other capitalist countries 


38 


where Zionist activity received official blessing had started an 
anti-Soviet campaign under the spurious slogan of “The Defence 
of Jews Against Bolshevik Anti-Semitism”. The Zionist slan- 
der forms the main content of their anti-Soviet fabrications even 
today. 

The Zionists have not concealed their fierce hatred for the 
communist movement. Berl Katzenelson, one of the Zionist lead- 
ers in Palestine, said: “We are still faced with the task of train- 
ing our youth to rebe] against ... those Jews who were so 
much the slaves of the Russian Revolution, ... including the Pa- 
lestinian Communist Party of our day... .”® 

In the 1940s, international Zionism reorientated itself to Amer- 
ican imperialism as the leading power in the capitalist system 
and the main pretender to “world domination”. At secret discus- 
sions in Washington, Zionist circles promised not to begrudge 
efforts for the fight against the forces of socialism and progress 
in return for support for their plans on the part of the United 
States. 

On February 25th, 1948, there was a meeting in the US State 
Department between Norman Armour (Assistant to the Secre- 
tary of State) and Charles Bohlen, a State Department adviser, on 
the one hand, and Benzion Netahyahu and Joseph B. Schecht- 
man, both prominent figures in the Revisionist Party, on the 
other. The Zionists assured the American diplomats that the 
newly-created Jewish state would be a “champion of Western 
ideals” and a “bastion against Communist penetration in the 
Middle East”. They recorded their ideas in a letter delivered to 
Charles Bohlen on March 2nd, 1948, which, in particular, read: 
“We urge the active support of the United States for the estab- 
lishment of a Jewish State in Palestine because we contend that 
this lies in the well-understood interest of the United States: a 
Jewish State, if established with the cooperation of the U.S., 
will necessarily become a bastion of the Western world in the 
Middle East, a national ally of the United States, bound to it 
by ties of gratitude and common interest.”® The letter went on 
to assert that such an American policy would prove to “. . .Jews 
all over the world ... that America is a friendly power and a 
reliable ally. 

“This and only this, will stop the dangerous pro-Soviet trend 

. and will secure the enthusiastic allegiance of world Jewry 


39 


and of the Jewish State to the cause of the Western Allies.’’1° 

The Zionists were active in the stirring up of the cold war, 
specialists from amongst their number of anti-communist propa. 
ganda being drawn into the provocative activity of The Voice 
of America, the BBC, Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe, 
The forged documents about “anti-Semitism” in the USSR and 
other socialist countries were printed on the pages of the bour- 
geois press. 

Zionist circles, which had taken a course of co-operation 
with the imperialist powers, seized power from the very outset 
in Israel. In 1950 the Israeli government openly supported the 
American aggression in Korea.‘ At a meeting of the Cabinet, 
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion even suggested sending Israeli 
soldiers to Korea to take part in the war of aggression.” 

As the facts show, the ruling circles of Israel linked the fate 
of this state with American imperialism. 


ALONG THE PATH OF 
ESPIONAGE AND PROVOCATION 


Israeli intelligence rendered its services to the special services 
of the USA and other imperialist powers in the conducting of 
subversive activities against the Soviet Union. In the 1950s it 
concluded a special agreement with the CIA, which was extreme- 
ly interested in using Zionist cadres. As the British author 
Anthony Pearson writes, “... the CIA, which was very weak in 
an area formerly dominated only by British Intelligence, became 
interested in the operations of Mossad, the Israeli Intelligence 
Service (IIS), and agreed on a deal with the Israelis by which 
they would work as a combined unit, relying entirely upon IIS 
penetration of surrounding Arab countries for all intelligence 
relating to the area, including the Soviet presence in it”.** James 
Angleton, the head of the CIA special operations department, 
had played a special role in the arrangement of this co-opera- 
tion. In the words of Anthony Pearson, “...his own plans were 
rooted in virulent anti-Soviet feelings, not in any sentimental 
support for the Jewish State”.** 

The American author Alfred M. Lilienthal bears witness to 
how close the co-operation between the secret services of the 


40 


USA and Israel was: “Chief of the CIA Richard Helms con- 
tinued to allow all U.S. intelligence operations inside Israel to 
be conducted through Mossad. There was no CIA station chief 
in Tel Aviv; officers working under cover in the American Em- 
bassy acted in consort with Israeli intelligence officers, each sup- 
posedly having full access to the other’s information.” 

The Zionists tried to use Israeli diplomatic representations for 
their subversive activities against the Soviet Union and other 
socialist countries. Acting under the guise of diplomats, em- 
ployees of the Israeli secret service time and again were caught 
while gathering secret information, as well as organising forged 
documents designed to prove non-existent “Soviet anti-Semitism’. 

However, the Zionists’ provocations suffered failure. The case 
of a certain Dolnik, who was arrested on May 26th, 1966 under 
Article 70 of the RSFSR Criminal Code, became a particular 
example of this. By means of an investigation drive it was proved 
that in 1965 Dolnik made contact with employees of the 
Israeli Embassy in Moscow and passed them a number of ma- 
terials which had earlier been ordered by Israel. In gathering 
the slanderous information demanded of him by the embassy rep- 
resentatives, Dolnik resorted to direct forgery. For example, 
he fabricated “photographic documents” which were to 
serve as poof of “Soviet anti-Semitism”. At the Jewish cem- 
etery he photographed a few tombstones and then, with the 
help of a montage, prepared forged photographs, on which 
the tombstones were defaced with swastikas. For passing var- 
ious kinds of “information” to the Israelis, he was materially 
rewarded.*® 

After diplomatic relations between the USSR and Israel were 
broken off in 1967, Zionist circles began to make greater use of 
tourism, scientific and: technical, cultural, and trade exchanges to 
send their emissaries to the Soviet Union. The employees of some 
Western embassies and a number of bourgeois newspaper corre- 
spondents in Moscow also maintained close contact with the 
Zionists. Here, efforts were made to involve Soviet citizens in 
anti-state activity and to use them to gather secret information 
and forge anti-Soviet documents. At the beginning of the 1970s, 
Candidate of Medical Sciences S. L. Lipavskii, a Muscovite, 
found himself amongst their number. Having subsequently real- 
ised the criminal] nature of the activity of the “Jewish activists” 


41 


group, of which he was a member, Lipavskii published an Open 
letter in the Soviet press. 

“Although these people had various opinions as to forms ang 
methods of action,” he wrote of the group’s members, “they haq 
a unified platform and a single leader—American intelligence anq 
foreign anti-Soviet organisations. They systematically obtaineg 
instructions, hostile literature and financial resources through 
underground channels. Their work was guided by D. Azbel, 
A. Lerner and V. Rubin... As early as 1972 it became known 
to me that this ruling group was closely linked with the em. 
ployees of some foreign embassies and accredited correspondents 
in Moscow. The most steady contacts were with Melvin Levitsk 
and Joseph Pressel, both of whom worked at the US Embassy, 
and with the American correspondents Peter Osnos, Fred Friend. 
ly and some others. In the flats of Rubin and Lerner, the afore. 
mentioned foreigners as well as the visiting emissaries from anti- 
Soviet centres Schmuckler, Noom, Manekofski and others dis- 
cussed and made various recommendations which essentially 
boiled down to a perversion of the problems of civil liberties and 
of human rights in the USSR.”?" 

It should be pointed out that this small group of renegades, 
who had called themselves “Jewish activists’, operated directly 
under the guidance of the CIA. Lipavskii wrote: “One of the 
documents I was passed in September 1975 via an_ especially 
secret hiding place said on behalf of the GIA: ‘Our govern- 
ment is naturally interested in information concerning the Jewish 
movement... We respect your concern and participation in this 
movement, but by concentrating on fulfilling our requests, you 
can, in time, be more effective in your fight with the system.’ ”” 

Anti-Soviet provocations were painstakingly prepared. L. B. 
Tsipin, another member of the underground group, made 
this confession: “Our ‘acts’ were timed for state holidays, top 
level meetings, international conferences, etc., as a rule. Foreign 
emissaries travelling as tourists or certain foreign newsmen and 
diplomats in Moscow instructed us when and whom we were to 
‘defend’. We then determined the time, the place, made the 
appropriate posters, and of course informed foreign reporters 
ahead of time. We also told them the names of those who would 
take part in the coming ‘acts’ so that the information would be 
passed on to our bosses as quickly as possible.”?° 


42 


The co-ordinated efforts of the centres of Zionism, Israeli in- 
telligence and the special services of the USA and other im- 
erialist countries will not bring success to their organisers. None- 
theless, the Israeli government and the leaders of international 
Zionist organisations are unwilling to accept the fact that they 
have lost the possibility forever of establishing control over the 
Jewish population in our country and in other socialist countries. 


AGENTS PROVOCATEURS 
DISGUISED AS “DEFENDERS 
OF SOVIET JEWS” 


The Zionists originally advanced the motto of “Free Develop- 
ment of Jewish Culture and Religious Activity in the USSR”, 
openly laying claim to the “right” to conduct nationalistic pro- 
paganda amongst Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality. This at- 
tempt at interference in the internal affairs of the USSR natu- 
rally failed. Then the claim of the “right of Soviet Jews to emi- 
grate to Israel” was placed at the forefront at the end of the 
1960s. Under the cover of this slogan, Zionist circles and their 
imperialist patrons were banking not only on breaking the unity 
of the multinational Soviet people, but also on supplying Israel 
with new cannon fodder with which to conduct aggression 
against neighbouring countries, and new settlers to colonise the 
occupied Arab lands. The peculiar fervour of the American Zion- 
ists in conducting this campaign is explained to a certain ex- 
tent by their efforts somehow to compensate for their own disin- 
clination to fulfill the World Zionist Organisation’s programme 
and move to the “Promised Land’’™*. 

The Zionists’ anti-Soviet campaign acquired a particularly 
wide scope since the beginning of the Israeli aggression in 1967. 
Laying bare the causes of this campaign, Gus Hall, the General 
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
USA wrote that anti-Sovietism is linked with the role of the 
Soviet ‘Union in the Middle East... ‘“The assistance of the So- 
viet Union has made it possible for the Arab nations to fight 


* “About 2,000 Jews are reportedly leaving the country [the US] 
each month, and more than 800,000 Israelis (out of a population of 3.9 
million) are living overseas.-—The New York Times, August 3, 1982. 


43 


for their liberation. They are able to fight the Israel-U. S. spon. 
sored aggression. 

“The extreme and hysterical campaign to spread anti-Soviet. 
ism in the Jewish communities is directly related to this strug. 
gle.”’° 

As for the malicious and provocative anti-Soviet propaganda, 
which has been deployed by the Israeli government and inter. 
national Zionism on a worldwide scale, the XIX Congress of 
the Israeli Communist Party showed that “...the anti-Sovietism 
of Israel’s ruling circles and the Zionist leaders is becoming ever 
more intense, reflecting their reaction to the fact that the Soviet 
Union is following a peaceful policy, asserting the rights of the 
peoples, opposing the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and 
supporting the creation of an independent Palestinian Arab 
state alongside the state of Israel’’.** 

In 1971 and 1976 anti-Soviet gatherings were conducted in 
Brussels under the libellous slogan of the fight against “Soviet 
anti-Semitism”. Thus, it was far from an accident that the 
former Israeli prime ministers David Ben-Gurion (in 1971) and 
Golda Meir (1976) figured at these assemblies as “stars”. ‘There 
were also leaders of American Zionist and pro-Zionist organisa- 
tions among the organisers and participants of these provoca- 
tions: William Wexler, the chairman of the Conference of Presi- 
dents of Major American Jewish Organisations; Arthur Gold- 
berg, Honorary President of the American Jewish Committee 
and a former member of the US Supreme Court; Rabbi Arthur 
J. Lelyveld, president of the American Jewish Congress; Ema- 
nuel Litvinoff, the publisher of a British Zionist magazine; Jer- 
ry Goodman, the director of the National Conference on So- 
viet Jewry; and Faye Schenk, the president of “Hadassah”, the 
Women’s Zionist Organisation of America, et al. 

A broad programme of anti-Soviet activity was worked out 
at the conference in 1971. Thus, the Commission on Work with 
Government layed special stress on expanding contacts with pol- 
iticlans in the free world in order through them to increase 
pressure on the USSR. The necessity was also emphasised of in- 
fluencing the governments of Latin America, Asia and Africa. 
The Commission on Work with Jurists adopted recommenda- 
tions on methods of concealing anti-Soviet provocations by refer- 
ences to international law. The Commission on Work with 


44 


Youth, which was headed by Mordechai Bar-On, who also head- 
ed the Youth and Hechalutz Department of the WZO, came 
out with proposals on how to direct young people’s political ac- 
tivity toward anti-Sovietism. The Commission on Mass Media 
generalised the “experience” of disseminating forged documents 
about “Soviet anti-Semitism” in newspapers and magazines, and 
on the radio and television. The Commission on Work with 
Non-Governmental Organisations prepared recommendations on 
drawing church establishments, political parties, professional as- 
sociations, 'trade unions, organisations representing national mi- 
norities etc. into the Zionist campaign. 

Today the ramified network of anti-Soviet organisations does 
not only exist in American Jewish communities. In Britain, the 
Women’s Campaign for Soviet Jewry, the National Council of 
Youth in Defence of Soviet Jews, and the National Council for 
Soviet Jewry were all established with this aim. Apart from that, 
the Soviet Jewry Committee of the Board of Deputies of British 
Jews was set up, which works in close contact with the All-Party 
Parliamentary Committee for Soviet Jewry. This entire organisa- 
tional complex is continually fanning an anti-Soviet sensation, 
trying at the same time to exert influence on the stand of gov- 
ernmental institutions in Britain. 

At the same time, Zionist organisations have expanded their 
activity, resorting to open violence to hamper detente between 
the USSR and the capitalist countries. Attacks on Soviet diplo- 
matic, trade and economic representations, attempts to ruin ap- 
pearances by Soviet artists and athletes, and arson and the use 
of firearms—such are the methods used by the Jewish Defense 
League and similar organisations like the Jewish Armed Resist- 
ance gang. 

A number of Jewish organisations which were previously of 
progressive orientation have also gone over to anti-Soviet posi- 
tions under the influence of Zionist propaganda. In the USA, 
for example, after 1967 the directors of the Morning Fretheit 
newspaper and the Jewish Currents magazine, as well as peo- 
ple grouping around them, all became included in the anti-So- 
viet campaign. Having slid into pro-Zionist positions, they recog- 
nised the Israeli aggression as being a “defensive” act and ac- 
cused the Soviet Union of intending to “destroy Israel”. Distort- 
ing the facts, they tried to show tthat the Soviet Union had 


45 


rejected its Leninist policy on the Jewish question and was prag. 
tising “official anti-Semitism”. To justify its position, this groy 
of anti-Sovietists put forward the spurious thesis that there exis, 
two Zionisms—“reactionary” and “progressive”. 

It is also important to note that the National Conference op 
Soviet Jewry was reorganised in 1971, into which came practj. 
cally all the main organisations—both Zionist and “non-Zion. 
ist”—of the American Jewish community. Local divisions of the 
NCSJ were also created, which were responsible for conducting 
campaigns “in defence of Soviet Jews” within Jewish communi. 
ties and acted as patrons over the relevant Soviet towns, estab. 
lishing contact with so-called “Jewish activists’ and potential 
emigrants. For example, local divisions of the NCSJ in New 
York receive instructions on writing letters, sending telegram. 
mes, making phone calls and organising personal meetings with 
Soviet citizens in Moscow, as well as obtaining the addresses of 
synagogues, scientific workers who have put in an application 
to leave the USSR, and “Jewish activists” who have been legally 
convicted of anti-Soviet activity. The NCSJ arranges demon- 
strations “in support of Soviet Jews”, and also boycotts of So- 
viet artists, exhibitions etc. abroad. 

Campaigns “in defence of Soviet Jews” were one of the ways 
of kindling nationalistic sentiments amongst the part of Jewish 
youth in Western countries which had been taken in by Zionist 
propaganda. Developing the spurious thesis of “anti-Semitism” 
and trying to gamble on the anti-fascist.feelings of the Jewish 
population, the Zionists advanced, for example, libellous asser- 
tions that in the USSR cultural genocide was being carried out 
in respect of Jews and that this should be regarded as only slight- 
ly less evil than the Nazis’ “final solution” to the Jewish prob- 
lem. 

There are several more organisations apart from the NOSJ, 
which specialise in work “in defence of the right of Soviet Jews 
to emigrate”: The Committee for the Repatriation of Soviet 
Jews, The Committee for the Liberation of Enslaved Soviet 
Jews, “Al Tidom”, the Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry, and 
the Jewish Defense League, each of which has its own definite 
direction of anti-Soviet activity. 

For example, the Committee for the Repatriation of Soviet 
Jews and “Al Tidom” send emissaries to the Soviet Union whose 


46 


functions include setting up groups of so-called “Jewish ac- 
tivists’’, recruiting potential emigrants, and dispersing Zionist 
and religious literature, ritual objects etc. Wide use is made of 
‘nternational tourism for such operations. 

We ought particularly to pause on the activity of the Jewish 
Defense League, which combines frenzied anti-Sovietism with an 
extremely reactionary stance on all questions of American pub- 
lic life. 

The political programme and tactics of the JDL bear an un- 
concealed pro-fascist character. It is in this that it mainly dif- 
fers from the majority of “respectable” Jewish organisations, 
which are trying to give a liberal slant to their nationalistic, 
anti-Soviet activity and to direct their attention to liberal circles 
in the American political arena. The JDL should be viewed as 
a kind of catalyst of the anti-Soviet campaign in the Jewish com- 
munity. Under pressure from and screened by the JDL, the 
main Jewish bourgeois-nationalistic organisations of the USA 
significantly broadened the scales of their anti-Soviet activity 
and supplemented their tactics of “undercover diplomacy” with 
open political pressure. This included the organisation of dem- 
onstrations, boycotts and so on. For the Zionists the activity of 
the Jewish Defense League is, above all, a “testing ground” for 
testing the influence of anti-Soviet slogans on the Jewish popula- 
tion. It is also an instrument for creating provocative sensations 
around the contrived question of “official Soviet anti-Semitism”’. 
Moreover, the JDL has demonstrated the possibility of directing 
the dissatisfaction of significant strata of Jewish youth into a 
nationalistic channel, which weakens the influence on them of 
progressive organisations. Finally, the JDL has begun to put 
fairly strong pressure on those bourgeois circles of the American 
Jewish community which, in their time, expressed doubt about 
the expediency of organising a broad anti-Soviet campaign. 

Although the support of the American Jewish community for 
the JDL’s adventuristic activity has recently fallen significantly, 
the League still remains a strike detachment of the anti-Soviet 
crusade of international Zionism. 

Proceeding from anti-Soviet political aims, Zionist propagan- 
da asserts that the “majority of Soviet Jews is seeking to leave 
the USSR”. In this it appeals to the most diverse reasons for 
emigrating—moral and ideological, political, spiritual, cultural, 


47 


and consumer reasons. Emigration is advertised as a way of ye. 
solving “spiritual and cultural” and other ideals, and is ajg, 
“based” on religious motives. 

The main aim of this campaign is to try to break the unity 
of the Soviet peoples, awaken nationalistic feelings amongst So. 
viet citizens of Jewish nationality and provoke enmity toward 
Jews in other Soviet citizens. As has already been said, the Zion. 
ists are at the same time trying to pick up masses of immigrants 
to “settle” in the occupied Arab lands. All this povocative actiy. 
ity is being directed by the Israeli government. 

Zionist propaganda tries day after day to incline people of 
Jewish nationality to emigrate to Israel. The spearhead of this 
ideological brainwashing is directed at the Soviet Union and 
other socialist countries, and uses radio, television, the printed 
word and emissaries from centres of Zionism who try to enter 
our country under the guise of tourists. Parcels and letters are 
sent from imaginary relatives. In most cases Zionist propaganda 
does not succeed in inclining this or that person to emigrate, 
and when this happens they try to blackmail or intimidate him. 

The vast majority of Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality cat- 
egorically reject the calls of the Zionist bosses to leave the So- 
viet Motherland for the “Promised Land”, and do not recognise 
the “dual nationality” foisted on them by the ruling circles of 
Israel. They do not need the “defence” or the “protection” of 
foreign centres of Zionism or Zionist organisations. Born and 
brought up in the Soviet Union, a country of full equality of 
citizens of any nationality, the absolute majority of Soviet Jews 
live and work for the building of communism, filled with a feel- 
ing of deep Soviet patriotism and internationalism. 

What, then, are the main aims of Zionist propaganda? First- 
ly, to discredit the Soviet order and the economic system of so- 
cialism, as well as the Leninist policy of the CPSU, the Soviet 
way of life, and socialist democracy; secondly, to kindle a “chain- 
reaction of nationalism” in the USSR, spread a myth about 
“internal opposition” and erode socialism from within; and, 
thirdly, to pervert the foreign policy course of the USSR, which 
is aimed at a reduction in international tension. 

The achievement of these strategic aims is divided by imperial- 
ist and Zionist propaganda to a number of tactical operations 
which try to neutralise the Marxist-Leninist conviction of Soviet 


48 


citizens and replace it with a bourgeois and nationalistic ideol- 
gy. They also seek to provoke anti-Soviet sentiments and create 
new ‘moral understandings’ and stances amongst certain 
groups of the Soviet population. 

Zionist and pro-Zionist propaganda is urgently puffing up 
the thesis that the fight against Zionism is ostensibly tanta- 
mount to anti-Semitism. In 1974 Arnold Foster and Benjamin 
R. Epstein, the leaders of the pro-Zionist Anti-Defamation League 
of Bnai B’rith, published The New Anti-Semitism, a libel- 
lous book in which they declare as the “enemies of Jews’ all 
those who do not share Zionist dogmas, above all, citizens of 
the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, communist par- 
ties, other progressive organisations and even bourgeois figures 
who criticise the aggressive policy of Israel’s ruling circles.*?-** 
At the same time, Zionist propaganda tries to pass off as the 
“friends of Jews” all reactionary forces which support the Is- 
raeli extremists, and to conceal the co-operation of Jewish bour- 
geois nationalists with all kinds of anti-communist and anti- 
Soviet groupings, many of which hold anti-Semitic positions. 

Slanderously accusing the Soviet Union of wanting to “de- 
stroy” Israel and spreading forged documents about “Soviet 
state-sponsored anti-Semitism”, Zionist circles have sunk to such 
a monstrous lie as declaring the USSR the “main enemy of Jews 
all over the world”. ‘The demand advanced by the Zionists for 
the “freedom of Soviet Jews to emigrate’? proved to be a con- 
venient pretext for the imperialists’ fight against a lessening of 
international tension. 


THE FIGHT AGAINST DETENTE: 
THE JACKSON-VANIK AMENDMENT 


In the 1970s the Zionist campaign “in defence of Soviet Jews” 
became one of the main weapons of the opponents of a normali- 
sation of American-Soviet relations, and of the enemies of the 
new tendencies in international relations. By this time a ramified 
anti-Soviet propaganda network had been set up by the WZO 
and other Jewish bourgeois-nationalistic organisations to serve 
the military-industrial complex of the USA. 

This network facilitated the advancement of the provocative question of the “position of Soviet Jews” to one of the firy 
places on the agenda of the US Congress in the first half of 
the 1970s. There were also other reasons caused, for example, by 
an increase in the influence of the Zionist lobby and the pro. 
Israeli coalition in the Senate and the House of Representa. 
tives, which, by then, had significantly broadened their politica] 
base. 

The aim of the Zionist lobby was to achieve an American 
stance which would make the improvement of Soviet-American 
relations dependent on the “permission of free Jewish emigra. 
tion from the USSR”. In order to carry out this task, Zionis 
circles chose the tactic of “tying” the question of emigration to 
the repeal of trade discrimination in respect of the Soviet Union, 
which was set out in the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. 

The mixed composition of supporters of Congress’s “tough” 
position on the “question of Soviet Jews” took shape as a result 
of the fairly complex aims pursued by Senators and Congress. 
men, which exaggerated the problem. The approach of Jacob 
Javits and a number of other liberal Senators to the question of 
the “position of Soviet Jews” was determined by a wish to 
ensure a development of the process of detente between the 
USA and the USSR along the way which would correspond, to 
a maximum extent, to American interests. The concept of de- 
tente, which had circulated in liberal circles in Congress, was 
drawn up on the erroneous premise that the Soviet Union could 
be compelled to re-examine its principled line not only in in- 
ternational affairs, but also in its domestic policy for the sake 
of improving relations with the United States. Many liberal bour- 
geois figures, therefore, including Jacob Javits and Abraham Ri- 
bicoff, reckoned on using the “question of Soviet Jews’ to set 
a precedent in Soviet-American relations and officially fortify 
the “right” of the USA to interfere in the USSR’s domestic 
policy. 

In contrast to the liberal members of Congress, who, in their 
own way, had believed in the possibility of “tying” detente to 
interference in the internal affairs of the USSR, figures such as 
Senator Jackson, who came out against detente in principle, 
were guided by other ideas. The binding of the question of 
Soviet Jews to the normalisation of trade. relations allowed right- 
wing members of Congress to resist one of the main directions 


50 


of Soviet-American detente at the same time as not directly op- 
posing the then President Richard Nixon, who favoured a nor- 
malisation of Soviet-American relations. ‘The pseudo-humanitar- 
‘an nature of the emigration question gave the opponents of 
detente the opportunity to hide the true character of their 
stance and provided a convenient cover for them to regroup 
their forces, with the aim of freezing the process of detente, 
stopping it, and then discarding it altogether. 

In Congress it was Senator Jackson who led the campaign 
to “tie’ the emigration question to that of American-Soviet 
trade relations. In principle he was able to carry behind him a 
maximally broad coalition—from liberal Democrats to conser- 
vative Republicans. Firstly, being among the more active sup- 
porters of the foreign policy course of the military-industrial 
complex, Jackson as a rule sided with conservative Republican 
Senators. Secondly, he was well-known for his moderate liberal 
position on questions of internal policy and enjoyed the constant 
support of the leadership of the AFL-CIO, and, thirdly, he ap- 
peared for many years as one of the leaders of the pro-Israeli 
coalition in Congress and established the closest of links with 
the Zionist lobby and the Israeli leadership. 

However, far from all shared Jackson’s approach in the Amer- 
ican Jewish community, including in bourgeois-nationalistic cir- 
oles. To many representatives of the Jewish bourgeois-nationalist- 
ic establishment, undercover pressure on the administration 
seemed more effective, with the aim of using the latter’s influence 
to guarantee the influx of emigrants Israel had demanded. Such 
an approach could be called “parasitism” on detente. Senators 
such as Jacob Javits and Abraham Ribicoff, who were famous 
for their pro-Israeli opinions, also held such positions. But Sen- 
ator Jackson took the initiative into his own hands, which per- 
mitted a strengthening of a much more extreme approach to this 
question in Zionist and pro-Zionist circles. This, in its turn, 
gave Jackson the corresponding tribune or political base to de- 
velop his campaign for an amendment to the trade law. This 
amendment envisaged “free emigration” of citizens of Jewish 
nationality from the Soviet Union as a condition for granting 
the USSR most-favored-nation status. As a result this question 
moved to the forefront in the struggle of American reactionary 
forces against detente. 


4% 51 


As early as September 1972, the Jackson machine had beguy 
working out the legislative framework which would make the 
granting of most-favored-nation status to the USSR conditional] 
on a change in the USSR’s policy on the emigration question, 
The text of the amendment to the trade bill, which included the 
administration’s suggestion to grant the Soviet Union most- 
favored-nation status, was composed directly by activists of the 
Zionist lobby in Washington: Richard Perle, assistant to Senator 
Jackson, and Morris Amitay, assistant to Senator Ribicoff. 

Before presenting the amendment to the Senate, Jackson had 
to enlist the support of the bourgeois-nationalistic leadership of 
the American Jewish community. At a Washington meeting of 
120 Jewish leaders called by the National Conference on Soviet 
Jewry on September 26th, 1972, he waxed emotional: “Get be- 
hind my amendment. And let’s stand firm!”* 

However, Jackson was not able to gain approval for this line 
immediately, because a group of Jewish community leaders was 
closely linked with the National Conference on Soviet Jewry 
Committee to Re-Elect the President (CREP), and was actively 
agitating for the Republican President amongst Jewish voters. 
They therefore did not want to find themselves in opposition to 
the Nixon administration on the eve of the elections. Apart 
from that, supporters of Nahum Goldmann, the then president 
of the World Jewish Congress, were amongst the participants in 
the NCSJ meeting. It was they who moved the slogan of “free 
cultural and national development of Soviet Jews” to the fore- 
front, yet failed to show particular enthusiasm for the demands 
for “free emigration”.?* Finally, representatives of Senator Javits 
attended the conference and came out in favour of a “less tough” 
approach to the emigration question. To a certain extent their 
stance was explained by rival ideas—they were dissatisfied with 
Jackson’s aspiration to present himself as the main “defender 
of Jewish affairs” and so to “monopolise” the political and eco- 
nomic support of the Jewish community in his own hands. There 
was also one more important element in the stance of liberal Sen- 
ators. They, and particularly Jacob Javits, had for many years 
supported the policy of “bridging the gap” with the Soviet 
Union and other socialist countries. They saw the expansion 
of trade between East and West as an important instrument of 
this policy. The competition between Jackson and Javits creat- 


52 


ed definite difficulties for the supporters of the amendment. 

In these conditions, the persuasion of Senators was intensified 
during the campaign started by the NCSJ on the grass-roots 
level, and in the run-up to the elections the demagogic cam- 
paign “in defence of Soviet Jews” gathered speed. Jackson and the 
Zionist lobbyists succeeded in exerting pressure on their opponent 
by organising protest in the Jewish community accusing Javits 
of being “soft” in respect of the Soviet Union. The “revolt” 
within the pro-Israel coalition was liquidated. 

Henry Jackson officially presented his amendment to the trade 
bill to the Senate on October 5th, 1972. By now the list of co- 
initiators of this amendment numbered 76 Senators, which auto- 
matically guaranteed its adoption by the Senate. An active cam- 
paign then began in the House of Representatives, where Con- 
gressman Charles Vanik presented a similar amendment. 

The Zionist lobby in Washington and beyond deployed a mass 
campaign of pressure on members of the House of Representa- 
tives, acting both directly and through the voters: “Vanik’s admin- 
istrative assistant, Mark Talisman, began a morning-to-night 
round of telephone calls to all 435 Congressional offices, inviting 
each member to be listed as co-sponsoring the same language 
(the Vanik amendment—S.R.) in the new session. He called 
some offices as many as 15 times. A simultaneous grass-roots 
campaign organised by the National Conference on Soviet Jewry 
began producing a steady harvest of constituent mail, even to 
Congressmen who had few Jewish constituents. The mail in- 
creased following a Jan. 18 letter to about 1.000 Jewish leaders 
across the country from a close associate of the Washington 
group, I. L. Kennen, executive vice-chairman of the American 
Israel Public Affairs Committee, which is registered to lobby for 
Israel’??, The New York Times magazine wrote. Charles Vanik 
introduced his amendment, which had been signed by 259 co-auth- 
ors, to the House of Representatives on February 7th, 1973. 

In his memoirs, former President Nixon characterised the 
groupings which united on the Jackson-Vanik Amendment plat- 
form: “... a fusion of forces from opposite ends of the political 
spectrum had resulted in a curious coalition. Kissinger later des- 
cribed it as a rare convergence, like an eclipse of the sun. On 
the one side the liberals and the American Zionists had decided 
that now was the time to challenge the Soviet Union’s ... emi- 


23 


gration policies, particularly with respect to Soviet Jews. On the 
other side were the conservatives, who had traditionally opposeq 
detente because it challenged their ideological opposition to con- 
tacts with Communist countries. My request in April 1973 fo, 
congressional authority to grant most-favored-nation trade status 
to the Soviet Union became the rallying point for both groups: 
the liberals wanted MFN legislation to be conditioned on eased 
emigration policies, the conservatives wanted MFN defeated on 
the principle that detente was bad by definition.”® 

The Jackson-Vanik Amendment seriously influenced the posi- 
tion of Congress in respect of the Soviet Union. Attempts by 
some members of the administration to hinder the introduction 
of the amendment by having private discussions with distinguished 
Congress members did not and could not have any result. 
Moreover, high-ranking administration officials tried to use this 
amendment to exert pressure on the Soviet Union and gain “con- 
cessions” on this question. Richard Nixon and his entourage es- 
sentially did not place the motives of the authors of the amend- 
ment under question. In a letter to Congress on April 10th, 
1973, concerning the introduction of the trade reform bill, the 
President expressed an understanding of “the deep concern which 
many of the Congress have expressed” over the emigration ques- 
tion. But at the same time he wrote that he did not share the 
opinion that “...a policy of denying most-favored-nation treat- 
ment to Soviet export is a proper or even effective way of deal- 
ing with this problem”.?® He argued that “free emigration” could 
be achieved using “quiet diplomacy”’. 

It should be stressed that the White House’s position was by 
no means consistent, and, in fact, played into Jackson’s hands. 
The Nixon administration had co-operated closely with Jackson 
on many important foreign policy questions, such as the war in 
Indochina, the situation in the Middle East, or the building up 
of America’s military potential. Henry Kissinger writes in his 
memoirs: “To my astonishment I found myself in confrontation 
with a former ally in what became an increasingly tense rela- 
tionship. What made the conflict both strange and painful was 
that I felt more comfortable with Jackson on most issues than 
with many newfound allies who questioned his amendment from 
a different philosophical perspective.”*° 

As a result, the administration failed to take measures in time 


54 


to break up the coalition of supporters of the Jackson Amend- 
ment, which the White House was banking on using to bring 
ressure to bear on the Soviet Union. Kissinger acknowledges 
that “Senator Jackson and the Nixon administration were both 
committed to the same objective: increasing emigration from 
the Soviet Union. The dispute was over tactics. The administra- 
tion doubted that overt pressure could succeed; Jackson insist- 
ed that no other method would work”.*! Kissinger was forced 
to admit that, instead of fighting the opponents of detente, the 
administration was hoping to come to a kind of “compromise” 
with Jackson and the Zionist circles. 

In the spring of 1973 the administration began behind the 
curtain talks with both prominent Congressmen and Zionist 
lobbyists. For example, on April 19th, 1973, Nixon invited fif- 
teen Jewish leaders to the White House. It was the first time 
that such a meeting had taken place at the initiative of an 
American President. Jacob Stein, chairman of the Conference of 
Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, Charlotte 
Jacobson, vice-chairman of the National Conference on Soviet 
Jewry, and Max Fisher, a man of the president’s retinue and 
former president of the Council of Jewish Federations and Wel- 
fare Funds, issued a statement on behalf of all the meeting’s 
participants: 

“We expressed our sincere appreciation to the President for 
the meeting which we regarded as a historic event. The Pres- 
ident reaffirmed his concern for the plight of Soviet Jews and 
pledged his continuing personal efforts on their behalf.”*? At the 
same time, the fact that this demagogic declaration failed to 
mention the Jackson Amendment showed that the leaders of the 
Jewish community were not ready unreservedly to give this act 
their support. 

The final decision to support the Jackson Amendment was 
taken after a number of meetings between the leaders of major 
Zionist and pro-Zionist organisations. Here, a growing convic- 
tion in the weakness of the administration in connection with 
the unfolding Watergate scandal played its part, too. Tel Aviv’s 
point of view was also reflected in the position adopted by the 
leadership of the American Jewish community both on this and 
many other questions. Gerald S. Strober, the executive chairman 
of the National] Interreligious Task Force on Soviet Jewry, wrote: 


55 


“The American Jewish groups rely on the Israelis for inte}}j. 
gence concerning the day-to-day experience of Soviet Jewry ang 
for more analytical projections of trends regarding emigration 
and Soviet policy directions. Israeli officials often meet with 
representatives of the major American Jewish agencies to discuss 
the Russian situation. In general, the Israelis have urged Amer. 
ican Jews to continue and even accelerate efforts aimed at 
keeping pressure on the Soviet government”.** 

A new stage in the fight around the Jackson Amendment un. 
folded in September 1973 when the Ways and Means 
Committee of the House of Representatives began to discuss it, 
By this time many members of Congress who had earlier agreed 
to co-initiate the Amendment were seeking ways of preventing it 
going to the vote. In the words of the American journalist Joseph 
Albright, “at least half of the Ways and Means Committee 
would have preferred to slap down the pesky Jackson-Vanik 
amendment before the trade bill reached the floor, but they did 
not dare”.?* All the same, two members of the Committee— 
James Corman (Democrat, California) and Jerry L. Pettis (Re- 
publican, California)—-came forward with a “compromise for- 
mula” at the request of the administration. This would give the 
President the right to decide whether most-favored-nation status 
should be granted to whichever country. The Zionist lobby, how- 
ever, succeeded in exerting such pressure on the authors of 
the “compromise” that the very next day they withdrew their 
proposal. 

However, even in these conditions, Nixon and Kissinger re- 
fused decisively to oppose Jackson and his supporters. “Still 
the Administration continued to seek a compromise with Jack- 
son,” Kissinger writes in his memoirs. “Our first move was to 
gain time through a parliamentary maneuver: to eliminate all 
reference to MFN in the trade bill then before the House so as 
to eliminate the Jackson amendment with it. The idea was to 
force a conference between the Senate, which was expected to 
pass Jackson’s amendment, and the House; in the conference we 
would then work out a compromise. It was a clever play thought 
up by our legislative liaison experts. It stood no chance. In fact, 
it demonstrated to what indirections our inability to fight the 
issue head-on had reduced us.”*° 


On September 26th, 1973, the Ways and Means Committee 


26 


with 18 (out of its 25 members) co-authors of the Vanik amend- 
ment passed it without a vote. It is significant that newly-ap- 
pointed Secretary of State Kissinger, who had publicly commit- 
ted himself to opposing the amendment nevertheless did not at- 
tend the hearings conducted by the Ways and Means Committee, 
although he had originally planned to appear there. 

The war in October 1973 provided the conditions for the 
Nixon administration to toughen up its internal policy stance a lit- 
tle, including on the question of the Jackson amendment. On 
October 11th Kissinger called on the leaders of the House of 
Representatives to delay the vote on the trade bill “for the sake 
of top state interests”, which was to have taken place a week 
later. Doubt also grew amongst the Zionist lobbyists as to whether 
the vote should be taken before it became clear whether Tel Aviv 
had changed its stance on this question, and they now concen- 
trated their activity on securing unprecedented military aid for 
Israel. 

On November 5th, 1973, Richard Maass, Jacob Stein, Charlot- 
te Jacobson had a decisive meeting with Senator Jackson. Jack- 
son also invited a number of his supporters, including Senator 
Ribicoff, David Blumberg, the president of B’nai B’rith, and all 
the members of the Washington Group. Joseph Albright wrote 
that “the meeting ended with Jackson, Ribicoff and Talisman 
(speaking for Vanik, who was out of town) telling the Jewish 
leaders unequivocally that they would press to have the amend- 
ment passed in both the House and Senate... .”°° “If we back 
down now, the Soviets will take advantage of it”,°’ Jackson 
blackmailed his supporters, threatening publicly to expose their 
opposition to the amendment. Jackson and his supporters thus 
declared what amounted to an ultimatum on those Congressmen, 
and the sponsors of the amendment decided that “it was time 
for a show of strength” and resorted to open pressure on the 
White House: “Lowell of the National Conference sent word to 
about 25 top officers of the major Jewish organisations, asking 
them to send telegrams expressing outrage in the strongest pos- 
sible terms to President Ford, with a copy of each to Kissinger. 
The object, according to one member of the Washington Group, 
was to make sure Ford knew he would be held directly respon- 
sible if the deal fell apart’’.°* 

President Ford again met with Senator Jackson on Septem- 


a7 


ber 20th, 1974 to discuss the “compromise”, and on Octobe; 
18th Jackson officially announced that he had reached an agree. 
ment with the administration which would include his ameng. 
ment in the text of the trade bill. The President, however, wa, 
conceded the right to suspend the ban on granting the USSR 
credits and most-favored-nation status for a period of 18 month, 
if he considered the Soviet Union to be executing the amenq. 
ment’s requirements. After that the President’s actions would 
be subject to the annual approval of both Houses of Congress, 
In the absence of such approval either House would have the 
right to veto the President’s actions within a period of 45 days, 

This agreement was consolidated in Kissinger and Jackson's 
letters to each other (“The Pact of two Henrys”), which, in 
particular, contained the administration’s assurance that the 
Soviet Union was allegedly ready to acknowledge the demands 
made on it concerning the conditions and volume of emigration, 
Here the administration consciously hid the fact that the Soviet 
side had decisively rebuked this attempt to interfere in its in- 
ternal affairs in a letter from A. A. Gromyko to Henry Kissin- 
ger on October 26th, 1974. 

When the Senate Finance Committee approved the bill to- 
gether with its amendments on November 20th, 1974, having first 
demanded that Kissinger personally testify the “assurances” be- 
fore the Senate discussed it, the Secretary of State resorted to 
direct misinformation. William Korey, one of the leaders of B'nai 
B’rith, noted: “The Gromyko letter was kept from the Senate, 
and the public. Kissinger made no reference to it during his 
crucial testimony in support of the Trade Reform Act before 
the Senate Finance Committee on December 3. He insisted that 
the use of the word ‘assurances’ in his letter to Jackson was based 
on solid evidence.”’*® Apart from that, the Secretary of State gave 
the Senators to understand in his speech that they should not 
pay any attention to the public declarations of the Soviet side 
against the amendment, since these supposedly bore a propagan- 
distic nature and did not reflect the true position of the USSR. 


The administration’s stance was aimed at turning the Jackson 
amendment into an effective instrument of interference in the 
internal affairs of the USSR. The “compromise” which Kissinger 
managed to reach did not alter the discriminatory provisions of 


28 


the Jackson amendment, but merely gave the administration the 
‘i portunity to use the amendment more resourcefully in its at- 
tempts to blackmail the Soviet Union. 

This “compromise” met with full approval on the part of the 
Zionist and pro-Zionist circles of the Jewish community which 
had interpreted Kissinger’s “assurances” as a recognition by the 
Soviet Union of “free emigration”. The NCSJ announced its 
support for the Kissinger-Jackson agreement as early as Novem- 
per 8th, 1974, regarding it as a complete victory for the campaign 
«n defence of Soviet Jews’. The disagreement between the 
supporters of a “rigid” backing of the agreement and those who 
favoured a more flexible course retreated into the background, 
and community leaders took a monolithic stance in favour of the 
Senate adopting the amendment. 

Having created the impression that the “compromise” was ac- 
ceptable to the Soviet Union, the administration at the same 
time effectively destroyed any opposition to the amendment in 
the Senate itself. The amendment was passed in the Senate on 
December 13th, 1974 by 88 votes to nil and, in fact, without 
having been discussed. The actual Trade Reform Bill was ap- 
proved by 77 votes to 4. On December 20th the Senate and the 
House of Representatives finally approved the text of the Jack- 
son-Vanik Amendment. 

The 1974 Trade Reform Act and the story of its passage 
through Congress vividly showed that the opponents of de- 
tente, headed by Jackson, had used the question of the “position of 
Soviet Jews”, which they had borrowed from Zionist circles, not 
so much to achieve “free emigration” as to hinder the develop- 
ment of Soviet-American relations in one of the most important 
fields, thus erasing much of the positive experience of the early 
1970s. 

In this way the significance of the anti-Soviet campaign un- 
der the libellous slogan of “defence of Soviet Jews” far exceed- 
ed the limits of the emigration question. In actual fact, an at- 
tempt was made to ruin the normalisation of Soviet-American 
relations and prevent the laying of solid foundations under the 
building of detente. In this the Zionist circles once again showed 
themselves to be an instrument of the most aggressive im- 
perialist powers which did not wish to recognise the new cor- 
relation of forces in the world. The main groupings of the rul- 


29 


ing class in the USA did not want to give up their hegemon;,. 
tic claims and agree to the introduction of the principle of equa) 
rights in their approach to the Soviet Union. Erroneous idea, 
about the aims and nature of Soviet-American detente even be. 
came spread amongst the realistically thinking circles of th, 
American bourgeoisie, and this was just playing into the hang, 
of those who wanted to follow a “tough line’. 

Zionist circles did American reaction an invaluable service by 
supplying the necessary slogans and developing tactics for , 
transfer to a counter-attack against detente. 

However, the main role in pushing through the Jackson-Va. 
nik Amendment was played by those circles connected with the 
military-industrial complex which opposed detente in principle 
The Jackson-Vanik Amendment became a turning manoeuvre 
which allowed them to regroup their forces and win time for 
a frontal assault on detente. In the final analysis, Jackson and 
those who, like him, opposed detente, used the Zionists in their 
own interests, having taken their slogans as weapons and gained 
their support and means of exerting pressure. The adoption 
of discriminatory legislation gave the Zionist circles, in their turn, 
appreciable “dividends” in the American domestic political arena 
by strengthening their mutual relations with the supporter 
of the military-industrial complex. As far as the emigration of 
Soviet citizens to Israel is concerned, which Zionist circles se. 
cured in connection with the Jackson amendment, Jackson and 
his followers seriously miscalculated. The Soviet Union decisive- 
ly rebuffed all attempts to interfere in its internal affairs. 


THE ALLY OF THE 
MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL 
COMPLEX 


During the struggle to get the Jackson amendment adopted, 
Zionist and pro-Zionist organisations became significantly clos- 
er to the most reactionary forces in the American political are- 
na. First of all the close co-operation of the pro-Israeli lobbyists 
with representatives of the military-industrial complex should be 
mentioned. Actively pushing through the programme of military 
aid to Israel, Zionist circles simultaneously played a noticeable 


60 


ole in guaranteeing governmental foreign military aid prograti- 
mes the necessary number of votes. From 1973 to 1975 these 
rogrammes had often been under threat of being blocked by 
Congress. For example, in individual instances aid to Israel and 
the South Vietnamese and South Korean regimes was combined 
‘1 a single “package”, which led to the “desertion” of some 
liberal supporters of Israel from the ranks of those who opposed 
dragging out the conflict in Indochina. The Israeli lobby also 
caused proposals on the withdrawal of some American troops 
from Western Europe to fail. 

As early as 1974 the American journalist Saul Friedman re- 
ported on “_. a swap between U.S. Jewish leadership and the 
Defense Department: support of a big budget for the Pentagon, 
something liberal-affiliated Organised Jewry usually opposes, in 
return for pledges to Israel from the U.S. government of a mili- 
tary, political and economic nature’”.*°-*1 He noted that “the 
Jewish community was in a similar fix when the Johnson and 
Nixon administrations put pressure on Jewish leaders to moderate 
their opposition to the Vietnam war in exchange for support 
of Israel.”’*2 Former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen- 
eral George S. Brown openly recognised the “particular” ef- 
fectiveness of the Zionist lobbyists in Congress. “We have the 
Israelis coming to us for equipment,” he said. “We say we 
can’t possibly get the Congress to support a program like that. 
They say, ‘Don’t worry about the Congress. We'll take care of 


the Congress’.’’** 

Taking the effectiveness of the Zionist lobbyists in Congress 
‘nto account, the Pentagon and the State Department themselves 
frequently make use of their services to force through Congress 
some decision or other which is in the interests of the mul- 
itary-industrial complex. It is well known how the administration 
used the support of the Zionist lobby to get Gongress to approve 
military aid to Turkey. What is less well known is that Zion- 
ist circles played an important role in the large-scale supply of 
arms to the Shah’s regime in Iran. For example, during the dis- 
cussion of the programme to sell Iran AWACS radar planes, 
Assistant Secretary of State Douglas J. Bennet sent out a confi- 
dential memorandum on August 19th, 1977 which provided for 
the mobilisation of the Israeli lobby in support of this pro- 


gramme.** 


61 


Characterising the weight of Zionist circles in the America, 
political arena, Gus Hall, the General Secretary of the Commy, 
nist Party USA, wrote: “Reactionary political candidates wh, 
respond to the campaign get support from people who othe,. 
wise would not vote for ultra-right candidates. 

“Because of this big lie the anti-Soviet campaign based j, 
the Jewish communities affects the whole political spectrum, 


The 1976 election campaign bears witness to the influence of 
Jewish bourgeois nationalists in the political life of the USA 
During the Democratic Party primaries Zionist circles backed 
Senator Jackson from the very beginning. ‘This representative of 
the military-industrial complex mainly used co-operation with 
Zionist lobbyists to broaden the financial base for his election 
campaign. Almost 80 per cent of the money he raised came 
from the leaders of the American Jewish community.*® Under 
the influence of Zionist propaganda 49 per cent of voters of 
Jewish origin voted for Jackson in the Democratic primaries,*' 
All the same, Jackson’s campaign suffered shattering failure and 
Jimmy Carter, the little-known governor of Georgia who origi- 
nally did not have any close ties with Zionist lobbyists, gained 
victory in the struggle within the Democratic Party. 

Jackson’s defeat in the primaries showed that the military- 
industrial complex and its Zionist allies were unable to secure 
the advancement of their candidate. In a number of pre-elec- 
tion speeches Jimmy Carter recognised the need comprehensive- 
ly to regulate the Middle East conflict and, together with the 
Soviet Union, to call a Geneva Peace Conference. The former 
governor of Georgia demagogically spoke out on the rights of 
the Palestinians and even allowed himself to admit that it had 
been a mistake to tie the question of Jewish emigration from the 
USSR to trade legislation. 

However, even on the eve of the Democratic Party confer- 
ence, relations began to change between Carter and his entourage 
on the one hand, and Zionist lobbyists on the other. The lead- 
ers of Jewish bourgeois-nationalistic organisations began more 
and more to work on the new leader of the Democratic Party. 
The Zionist lobby in Washington, which had supported Richard 
Nixon, the Republican candidate, in 1972, soon began agitation 
in favour of Carter (George McGovern, also a Democrat, had 


62 


not seemed “tough” enough to the Zionist lobbyists, in spite of 
his pro-Israeli rhetoric). 

Of course, President Carter was indebted to the support of a 
coalition of political forces reflecting the interests of the main 
groupings of the American ruling class for his victory at the 
elections in November, 1976. The Zionist circles in the Jewish 
community had merely facilitated a change of government in 
Washington, but had by no means determined it. It must not 
be forgotten in all this that, after certain failures at the begin- 
ning of the election campaign, the Zionist lobby quickly reorien- 
tated itself to Carter, who was the eventual victor of the pre- 
election fight, although they had not originally supported his 
candidacy. 

The struggle around questions of foreign policy which unfold- 
ed in the American political arena after the Carter administra- 
tion came in was not given a homogeneous evaluation in the 
American Jewish community. The majority of the Jewish popu- 
lation supported the policy of detente, including some represen- 
tatives of the bourgeoisie and particularly those who had called 
for the Jackson amendment to be countermanded and supported 
the Committee for Agreement Between East and West. How- 
ever, realistically thinking people formed but the minority in the 
communities’ leadership, where representatives of Zionist and 
pro-Zionist circles enjoyed great influence. 

There was a time when considerable anxiety was caused in 
Zionist circles by Carter’s declarations concerning a regulation 
of the situation in the Middle East. In the summer of 1977 the 
Zionists began a campaign of exerting pressure on the White 
House with the aim of hampering its retreat from a pro-Israeli 
line. The campaign reached its climax on October Ist, 1977, 
with the publication of the Joint Soviet-American Declaration 
on the Middle East, which opened up the way to achieving a 
general and lasting regulation of the situation in that region, 
taking into account the interests of the Palestinian people. 

The Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith accused the ad- 
ministration as early as October 3rd of furthering a “strengthen- 
ing of Soviet influence” in the Middle East. On October 12th, 
1977, the National Jewish Community Relations Advisory Coun- 
cil (NJCRAC) sent out secret instructions to its constituent or- 
ganisations. These instructions demanded that a regional or state- 


63 


wide conference be convened following the adjournment of Cop. 
gress and that it be keynoted by Congressional spokesmen; tha, 
a delegation including non-Jewish public figures be sent to Wash. 
ington D.C. to meet with Senators and Congressmen before 
adjournment; that a massive flow of letters to the White House 
in the coming weeks be systematically ensured; that speakers be 
placed before key local groups and parlor meetings be arranged by 
Jewish leaders among their peers in the power structure of the 
general community; that preparation and placement be stimulat. 
ed of op-ed pieces by academicians and others with expertise 
on the Middle East; and that a steady stream of letters to news. 
paper editors be maintained, particularly from prominent loca] 
figures.* 

In a report made by the NJCRAC on November 2nd, 1979, it 
was noted that measures against the Joint Declaration had been 
implemented in 92 towns and states. In the meantime the Amer- 
ican Jewish Committee’s National Executive Council declared 
that ‘“‘a crisis of confidence in the administration’s Middle East- 
ern policy has arisen among American friends of Israel.’’** 

Attacks on the Joint Soviet-American Declaration reached un- 
precedented scale even for the Zionist lobby. A well-organised 
wave of protests, demonstrations and speeches against the White 
House swept across the country, and many leaders of the admin- 
istration hesitated as a result of this campaign of pressure. In 
a few days the administration renounced the stance set out in 
the Joint Soviet-American Declaration and took a completely 
opposite course aimed at encouraging a separate Egyptian-Israeli 
accord. 

It would be wrong to consider this about-turn in Washington’s 
policy the result only or primarily of pressure from Zionist cir- 
cles. The Zionist lobbyists were not the only ones to oppose the 
Joint Declaration, but were joined by those reactionary Amer- 
ican forces which incited the government to reject any co-opera- 
tion whatsoever with the Soviet Union. Henry Jackson, Daniel 
Moynihan and leader of the AFL-CIO George Meany, the 
Committee on the Present Danger, reactionary emigrant organi- 


* See: National Jewish Community Relations Advisory Council, 
October 12, 1977, Summary of Guide to Action on Middle East, 
N. Y., 1977. 


64 


sations, the leaders of the Republican Party and of faction groups 
of Democrats in Congress—such was the spectre of opposition 
to a comprehensive regulation of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 

As time has shown, the leaders of the administration them- 
selves by no means consistently supported the convocation of a 
Geneva peace conference in which all interested sides would par- 
ticipate. For Jimmy Carter the Joint Soviet-American Declara- 
tion was just one of his regular policy zigzags, which at the end 
of 1979 and the beginning of 1980 finally resulted in an open 
about-turn to a policy of confrontation with the Soviet Union. 
As on other questions, the Carter administration showed itself 
to be an unreliable partner on questions of regulating the Mid- 
dle East situation, a partner guided not by a striving for detente 
and lasting peace, but by the self-seeking interests of American 
imperialism. 


A COURSE TO CONFRONTATION 


In this way, as in the case of Jackson amendment, anti-Soviet 
circles once again succeeded in getting Washington to refuse to 
fulfil its obligations to the USSR, which it had officially taken 
on itself. In the second half of the 1970s reactionary American 
circles headed by representatives of the military-industrial com: 
plex made a direct assault on detente, using the “experience” 
acquired during the struggle over the Jackson amendment. The 
campaign “in defence of Soviet Jews” resulted directly in a prop- 
agandistic wise over so-called “violations of human rights” in 
the USSR. 

Zionist circles were active in this demagogic campaign started 
by the Carter administration. Just two weeks after the new ad- 
ministration came in, the American Jewish Congress and the 
Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith expressed their support 
for the White House’s new attempts to interfere in the internal 
affairs of the Soviet Union on the pretext of “defending human 
rights’, As Arthur J. Goldberg, the head of the American dele- 
gation at the Belgrade meeting frankly declared at the time, the 
aim of this campaign was “... to give hope to dissenters in the 
Soviet Union’*®. For the Belgrade Conference Zionist circles 
specially prepared a provocative report containing flagrant slan- der of the USSR’s policy, and a delegation of the Nationa) 
Interreligious Task Force on Soviet Jewry was sent to the 
city. 

At the beginning of 1979, when the congress of the 96th cop. 
vocation was getting down to work, the National Conference 
on Soviet Jewry announced a new anti-Soviet campaign unde; 
the heading “Intervention-96”. According to this campaign, each 
of the 100 Senators and 435 Congressmen was to take so-called 
“Jewish activists’ in the Soviet Union under his “patronage”. 
This provocative undertaking was initiated by eight active figures 
in the pro-Israeli coalition—four Senators (Democrats Claj. 
borne Pell and Howard Metzenbaum and Republicans Richard 
Schweiker and Robert J. Dole) and four Congressmen 
(Democrats Sidney Yates and James Blanchard and Republicans 
Willis Gradison and Jack Kemp). The Zionists also created a 
new organisation—the Congressional Wives Committee for 
Soviet Jewry—to attract American legislators more actively into 
this activity. 

The Zionists and other anti-Soviets were particularly active 
in the USA in connection with the case of A. Shcharansky, who 
was convicted by a Soviet court of spying for a foreign state. 
Zionist propaganda libellously alleged that he had been convict- 
ed for “wishing to leave the USSR”. In actual fact, he was 
a member of a group of “Jewish activists’ together with Ler. 
ner, Rubin and certain other renegades in the service of the 
CIA. 8S. L. Lipavskii, a former member of this group, wrote in 
Izvestua: 

“To increase tension in relations between the USA and the 
USSR Lerner suggested secretely gathering information about 
Soviet defence establishments and enterprises in order to use 
this pretext to persuade Western firms to stop supplying techni- 
cal equipment to the USSR. After leaving the USSR, Rubin 
was to conduct the relevant consultations on this question and 
inform Lerner. 

“In August, 1976, a letter arrived from Rubin through the 
American correspondent Osnos, with a request to speed up the 
dispatch of this information in order to give a lift to the cam- 
paign to ban the sale of American equipment to the USSR. 
Although there was opposition to the gathering of such ma- 
terials, since this constituted overt espionage, Lerner nevertheless 


66 


‘nstructed Shcharansky and others to obtain the information he 
wanted and to send it abroad. 

“Tt must be stressed that the question of rendering the Ameri- 
cans the necessary assistance in obtaining intelligence informa- 
tion on scientific, technical and military subjects, as well as on 
political questions, was always on the agenda. All these were 
focused on the help to CIA agents in Moscow under the guise 
of official functionaries, and support to the notorious Jackson 
amendment to the bill on trade with the USSR.”°°-*? 

The Soviet court thoroughly examined the evidence concern- 
ing Shcharansky’s having gathered information both personally 
and through accessories on the location and affiliation of defence 
industry enterprises and installations connected with them. Keep- 
ing to the conspiracy, he systematically passed all this informa- 
tion to foreign agents right up to his arrest in March 1977. The 
court was presented with a lot of evidence on Shcharasky’s crim- 
inal activity, including a letter from a foreign intelligence 
agent telling him to gather secret information, and a special 
questionnaire with a list of intelligence questions. The court 
ascertained that he had prepared and sent abroad no less than 
17 forged documents which were used in the West for purposes 
hostile to the Soviet state.°? 

Making Shcharansky out to be a “victim of Soviet anti-Semi- 
tism’’, Zionist circles and their allies tried to use this lie to incite 
a new spiral of worsening of American-Soviet relations. The 
adventurist N. Stiglitz came to America from Israel who, under 
the name of Avital Shcharansky, was to make herself out 
to be his wife. She was not only used to appear at all kinds of 
anti-Soviet gatherings, but also to attract leaders of Congress 
and the administration into the campaign of provocation. Jimmy 
Carter himself publicly took Shcharansky under his protection, 
and both Houses of Congress adopted a resolution hypocritically 
expressing indignation at the “violation of human rights” that 
have allegedly taken place.™* 

The aim of this campaign of provocation was to avert the 
abrogation of the Jackson-Vanik amendment, since a number 
of Congressional figures headed by Paul Findlay (Republican, 
Illinois), a member of the House of Representatives, had come 
out in favour in 1977-1978 of normalising trade and economic 
relations between the USA and the USSR. Moreover, the cam- 


5¢ 67 


paign organised by the Zionists was used to curtail scientific ang 
technical links between the USA and the Soviet Union. In July 
1978, the National Conference on Soviet Jewry and the Con 
ference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organization, 
issued a joint statement calling on the administration “. . .to see} 
an immediate freeze of the export of American technology 4, 
the USSR”.** This demand was supported by Senators Moyyj. 
han and Jackson, as well as by other representatives of the mij. 
itary-industrial complex on Capitol Hill. Under the thumb 
the anti-Soviets, President Carter declared a ban on the sal 
of the Sperry Rand Univac computer to TASS. A number of 
trade unions and the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S, 
were also drawn into this anti-Soviet campaign. 

Continuing their libellous campaign “in defence of Soviet 
Jews”, Zionist circles above all aimed at keeping discriminatory 
measures in force against the Soviet Union in the trade and eco. 
nomic sphere. It was with this aim that pressure was brought 
to bear on those politicians who had favoured getting rid of 
obstacles to the development of American-Soviet relations. Fairly 
pointed clashes were even recorded in the very apex of the Jewish 
community between Zionists and those bourgeois circles who 
were interested in developing trade with the USSR. However, 
the Carter administration’s refusal to back the abrogation of 
discriminatory amendments helped the Zionists and their allies 
to hinder progress in this area. By keeping the Jackson amend- 
ment in force it became easier for reactionary circles to prepare 
the ground for the President to declare the policy of economic 
sanctions against the Soviet Union in January 1980. 

The Zionists also took a hand in the anti-Soviet campaign 
aimed at disrupting the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow by 
starting a rumour that Israel would not be allowed to compete. 
On this and other pretexts they tried to organise pressure on 
capitalist Jewish firms which had concluded contracts to supply 
goods for the Games, sell souvenirs and broadcast television pro- 
grammes from the Olympics (Occidental Petroleum, Lazard Freér- 
es et Cie, Lehman Brothers, Kuhn, Loeb & Co., and NBC TV). 
It should be noted, however, that the Zionists failed to enlist 
the support of the majority of the American Jewish community 
on this question. 

As we can see, the Zionists continued to intensify their anti- 


68 


Soviet campaign during the Carter administration. In these condi- 
tions this campaign became the constituent element of the fron- 
tal assault of all reactionary forces in the USA on detente. It 
was already considered unnecessary to resort to concealing the 
sinister aims of the supporters of the cold war with forced ques- 
tions of emigration and the such like. From now on the attack 
was directed against the very principle of peaceful co-existence 
of states with differing socio-economic structures. This was shown 
most graphically in the struggle around SALT-II. While both 
progressive forces and some realistically thinking representatives 
of the apex of the Jewish community came out in favour of rat- 
ifying SALT-ITI, the Zionist lobbyists operated through the 
Jewish Institute for National Defense, an organisation which sets 
itself two goals: to inform the Jewish community of the im- 
ortance of strengthening the US’s defence to ensure the survi- 
val of the USA and Israel, and to enlighten American public 
opinion on the geopolitical value of Israel to the USA as an 
outpost of Western interests in the Middle East. At a meeting 
of a group of leaders of Jewish bourgeois-nationalistic organisa- 
tions with Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, which was organ- 
ised by the Jewish Institute for National Defense in December 
1979, they spoke out against SALT-II and expressed support 
for increasing the Pentagon’s budget. 

The role of Zionist and pro-Zionist circles showed itself par- 
ticularly clearly in connection with the conference of signatory 
states to the Helsinki Agreement held in Madrid from 1980 to 
1982. Trying to “bury” detente, reactionary circles in the USA 
and other Western countries spared no efforts to hinder the work 
of the Conference and use it to interfere in the internal affairs 
of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. Representa- 
tives of the Brussels Presidium of ‘“‘conferences in defence of So- 
viet Jews” and anti-Soviets from B’nai B’rith and the NCSJ who 
had turned up in Madrid also worked in concert with them. 

William Korey, the director of International Policy Research 
of the International Council of B’nai B’rith who has taken part 
in practically every one of the Zionists’ anti-Soviet provocations 
In recent years, was named “our man in Madrid” in confidential 
reports to this organisation’s International Council. Having arrived 
in the Spanish capital on November 13th, 1980, he began 
energetic work to push a forged document about “Soviet anti- 


69 


Semitism” through the international forum. Let us cite some 
excerpts from his weekly reports, which were supplied to the 
leaders of B’nai B'rith. 

In Report No. 1 of November 16, 1980, Korey reported: “The 
speech of Griffin Bell, head of U.S. delegation was excellent 
and we had a small hand in pressing for inclusion, high up, of 
the Soviet Jewish emigration issue and of Shcharansky (in a 
detailed manner). Stanley Lowell* did the inside lobbying but 
I was pushing on the outside.” In Korey’s words, “his job” was 
to include these false problems in the text of American delegates 
speeches at closed sessions of the Conference to which corre. 
spondents and the public were not admitted. “I shall have reg. 
ular meetings with government professionals on what is and what 
is not being done,” he reported. “On Tuesday, will have a long 
breakfast with Kampelman and hope to be filled in. We've talked 
several times and I have had a long lunch with Spencer Oliver 
of U.S. Helsinki Commission. Also long discussions with key staff- 
ers Guy Coriden and Meg Donovan. They’re ‘gung ho’ on 
our issues and are determined to have it raised in every possible 
forum.” 

In Report No. 2 of November 19, 1980, Korey wrote about 
the measures taken by the lobbyists to turn the question of 
Soviet Jews into “... a central issue at the Madrid Conference”. 
It was with this aim that a press briefing was held, which was 
attended by correspondents from Associated Press, UPI, Reuters, 
The New York Times, Le Monde, and West German, Spanish 
and Israeli newspapers. 

“We are still trying to visit with every Western and neutral 
delegate to make certain that when matters reach the working 
group stage next week (November 24) on individual baskets— 
human rights, disarmament, economic matters—the USA will 
not be alone in taking a strong line ... concerning all aspects 
of the Soviet Jewish plight,” Korey reported. 

A number of representatives of Zionist and pro-Zionist figures 
also worked with Korey, co-ordinating anti-Soviet actions. 
“Jerry Goodman (National Conference on Soviet Jewry Direc- 
tor) arrives on Friday and Burt Levinson on Sunday,” Korey 


* President of the NCSJ. 


7) 


wrote. “At their request, a private dinner has been arranged for 
the key figures in the U.S. delegation, especially including Con- 
gressman Dante Fascell and Senator Clairborne Pell. Prior to 
the dinner, we are entertaining twenty or so of a congressional 
delegation, ... Spencer has arranged for me to have access 
(with a special badge) to the conference centre (although the 
sessions are Closed).” 

In report No. 3 of November 23, 1980: “Griffin Bell on Fri- 
day gave his second speech (the text of which I now have) to 
the closed plenary. It focused on scientific and economic ex- 
changes. Twice he mentioned the Jewish issue, sharply criticizing 
the USSR.” The lobbyists intended regularly to put pressure 
on the participants in the Conference: “Big plans are in the 
works for early December. December 4—Jewish community lea- 
ders from the various European countries will meet here with 
their respective governmental delegates. December 8-10 Chief 
Rabbis of European countries will do the same. December 10 
(Human Rights Day) the parliamentarians (non-Jewish) of Eu- 
ropean countries will assemble to press the case for Soviet 
Jewry. Press Conferences are planned for each event.” As it 
could be expected Avital Shcharansky also had come to 
Madrid. 

In Report No. 4 Korey informed the International Council 
of Bnai Brith with satisfaction that “the Soviet Jewish issue 
has surfaced far more effectively, far more often, and in a much 
more varied fashion than at Belgrade or at any international 
forum...” In his words, this “.. .is a reflection of the work and 
lobbying of the Brussels Praesidium, some of consequence of 
Max’s (Kampelman—S.R.) personal interest.”” He went on, 
“Max Kampelman will be giving a major speech on Soviet anti- 
Semitism, drawing upon the ‘Blue Book’ material,” which was 
prepared by Zionist masters of provocation. 

With unconcealed satisfaction Korey reported that the Amer- 
ican delegation had formed the closest of relations with the 
Zionist lobbyists: “Max Kampelman has been extraordinarily help- 
ful in meeting for two long lunches with me. He has provided 
access to various sources and areas and his entire staff, especial- 
ly Spencer Oliver and Meg Donovan, have been more than 
usually helpful ... And I have neglected to discuss my numerous 
meetings with many members of the public U.S. delegation, in- 


71 


cluding Sol Chaikin, Amb. Leo Lerner, Julius Michaelson, ang 
especially Ben Epstein.” 

To all the above it should be added that Max Kampelman, 
who headed the US delegation in Madrid after the Reagan aq. 
ministration came in, is himself one of the bourgeois-nationalistic 
apex of the American Jewish community, is a member of the 
leadership of a number of pro-Zionist organisations, and for man 
years personally took part in Zionist lobbying in the highest 
echelons of the American government. 

Thus, in counterbalance to the constructive line taken by the 
USSR and other socialist countries, the USA and its NATO 
allies tried to block the solving of questions of security and co. 
operation at the Madrid Conference, and to turn the forum in 
the Spanish capital into an arena of ideological confrontation 
and use it to interfere in the internal affairs of socialist states. 
It was with these aims that an unprecedented attempt was made 
to stage a well-rehearsed show designed to disorient public 
opinion. As the facts indicate, Zionist circles played far from 
the smallest role in the organisation of this show, as a result of 
which and because of the destructive stance taken by the Reagan 
administration, the Madrid Conference failed to reach an agree- 
ment on its final document and specific measures to further de- 
tente and disarmament. 

Zionists play a particular role in the so-called neo-conserva- 
tive circles which are closely linked with the Reagan administra- 
tion. Amongst the leaders of the neo-conservatives, such repre- 
sentatives of the Jewish bourgeois-nationalistic intelligentsia 
should be pointed out as Norman Podhoretz, the editor of Com- 
mentary magazine (published by the American Jewish Commit- 
tee), and Irving Kristol, the editor of Public Interest magazine 
(published by the American Enterprise Institute). These figures 
play an active role in working out the political course of the 
reactionary forces of the monopolistic bourgeoisie of the USA. 
Their pro-Zionist stance goes with the propaganda course of 
building up the arms race and international tension, and towards 
a confrontation between Washington and the forces of socialism 
and national liberation. 

Norman Podhoretz, for example, pushes the myth about a 
“Soviet threat” and tries to prove the need to return to the doc- 
trine of “containing” the Soviet Union which arose during the 


72 


cold war. “... Far from being obsolete, the case for containment 
was even stronger now that the Soviet Union had become pow- 
erful enough to pose a serious threat to the democratic world 
than it had been in the days when we were so much more pow- 
erful than they,” he whote."-" In his words, support for the 
aggressive Course of Israel is “inextricably” connected with Amer- 
‘can military superiority. He declares that “... hostility to anti- 
Communist interventionism was as dangerous to Israel as ... 


anti-Zionism”’.°? 


THE JUNIOR PARTNER OF 
AMERICAN IMPERIALISM 


Zionist circles have formed the very closest of links with the 
Reagan administration, which reflects the interests of the most 
reactionary circles of American monopoly capital. The platform 
of the Zionist allies of the White House was set forth in a po- 
litical resolution adopted in May, 1982 at the annual Confer- 
ence of the American Israeli Public Affairs Committee. Justifying 
the course of building up international tension and the arms 
race, this platform repeats the hackneyed fabrications about a 
“Soviet threat”. “The United States should strengthen its de- 
fenses to check Soviet subversion and aggression in the Middle 
East, the Persian Gulf and throughout the world,”*® the Zionist 
lobbyists declare, using the standard selection of anti-Soviet slan- 
der which Washington spreads in order to hide its own plans for 
world domination. The Zionists are simultaneously trying to 
stir up a libellous campaign about non-existent “Soviet anti-Se- 
mitism’” and demanding “an increase in the level of emigration” 
from the USSR. 

Thus, the course of the Reagan administration, which is aimed 
at building up international tension and the arms race, receives 
the full support of the Zionists. They actively participate in 
Washington’s efforts to interfere in the internal affairs of their 
nations. Subversive centres of Zionism joined, for example, the 
campaign to undermine the socialist order in Poland. Together 
with the secret services of the USA and other imperialist pow- 
ers, “experts” on anti-socialist propaganda from Zionist and pro- 
Zionist organisations thought that they would be able to pull 
Poland out of the socialist community. After these counterrevo- 


3 


lutionary plans had failed, the Reagan administration yp. 
leashed an unbridled anti-Polish and anti-Soviet campaign, 

The course of the ruling circles of the USA towards confrop. 
tation with the forces of peace and social progress has led ty 
a tangible worsening of the situation in many regions of the 
world. In Central America, for example, Washington is interfer. 
ing more and more in the internal affairs of El Salvador, Gua. 
temala and other countries where the struggle of the people; 
against oligarchic regime is intensifying. The Reagan administra. 
tion has openly taken the side of the bloody dictators, with 
whom the Zionists have already been in close contact for a long 
time. 

The pro-American regimes in Latin America and other areas 
of the world occupy a prominent place amongst the forty odd 
countries to which the Israeli Zionists sell arms. According to 
figures published in the press, Israel’s arms exports reached 
9,000 million dollars in 1982. The Zionist “death trade” boom 
began in the second half of the 1970s, when the Carter adminis. 
tration tried not to advertise American support for dictators, 
Each time the White House hypocritically expressed its “non- 
involvement” in the bloody crimes of anti-popular regimes and 
demonstratively declared the curtailment of American arms sup- 
plies, the Zionist “dealers in death” immediately appeared in the 
arena. Thus, in Nicaragua “in the last two years of Somoza’s 
reign, when 500,000 Nicaraguan civilians were killed, 98 per 
cent of his arms came from Israel. . .”>® The national guard was 
armed with Israeli submachine guns, armoured cars, artillery 
weapons and Arava planes, which proved to be most “effective” 
for bombing peaceful Nicaraguan villages and the poor areas of 
towns on the dictator’s orders. 

The Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner, the military fas- 
cist dictatorship in Guatemala and Augusto Pinochet, the butcher 
of the Chilean people—all number amongst the clients of the 
Zionist “dealers in death”. During his visit to Chile in 1979, the 
then Deputy Minister of Defence of Israel, Mordechai Zipponri, 
offered the junta comprehensive military aid. In accordance with 
one of the deals which were concluded the Chilean military pur- 
chased 1500 Israeli Shafrir missiles with an infra-red homing 
system. As the London magazine The Middle East reported in 
September 1981, after the Guatemalan dictatorship took re- 


74 


prisals against students in 1979, Israel sold the military regime 
more than fifty thousand Galil assault rifles, fifteen transport 
planes and five troop-carrying helicopters. 

Israeli arms and anti-guerilla experts played a particularly im- 
portant role in the fight with partisans in El Salvador. While the 
Reagan administration did not decide to back out the game 
“i, defence of human rights’ and openly send American arms 
and military advisers to this country, support from the Zionists 
was of decisive significance for Salvadorian reaction. 

These profitable deals with the Salvadorian and Guatemalan 
regimes were organised by Markus Katz, an Israeli citizen, who 
has already been living in Mexico for fourteen years, and who 
regularly travels to Israel with potential customers from Latin 
America.°°-®* 

The Zionists’ links with the Republic of South Africa also play 
a special role. The Jewish community of this country has already 
firmly held on to first place in the amount of money collect- 
ed for Israel (per head of population). Apart from that, uncut 
diamonds from the Oppenheimer mines in South Africa are 
treated in Israel, which is of great significance for both coun- 
tries’ economies. In recent years economic and technical co- 
operation has increased between Israel and South Africa, above 
all in the military field. 

In South Africa production has been started under an Israeli 
licence of the Uzi submachine gun and certain other firearms, 
and Israel is assisting the South African aerospace industry in 
the production of the Mirage type planes, the technical spec- 
ifications for which were stolen in France by the Zionist secret 
services. In their dockyards the South African racists are co- 
operating with Israeli specialists in building war boats and sub- 
marines. 

Pretoria has become the main purchaser of Israeli weapons, 
buying, among other things, warships, missiles, and artillery weap- 
ons. In its turn, Tel Aviv has purchased British-built tanks in 
South Africa and then special types of steel to fortify their ar- 
mour. Israel later rendered South Africa assistance to modernise 
the South African Army’s tanks. In recent years joint enterprises 
have been set up to produce troop-carrying helicopters (in 
Israel) and radioelectronic equipment (in South Africa). 

Reports about nuclear co-operation between Israel and South 


(fs) 


Africa cause particular concern amongst the world public. Foy. 
eign specialists believe that Israel had already developed the tech. 
nology to produce nuclear weapons in the 1960s. And in Sout, 
Africa there are enormous deposits of nuclear raw materials 
Close co-operation has been established between the faculty of 
nuclear physics at Johannesburg University and the Weizmann 
Institute of Science in Israel. General A. Herev, the former qj. 
rector of the science department of the Israeli Munistry of De. 
fence, publicly admitted his participation in the nuclear research 
being carried out in South Africa. 

To all appearances, the mysterious explosion in the Southern 
part of the Atlantic Ocean in September 1979, which was picked 
up by an American intelligence satellite, was a nuclear wea- 
pon test. The majority of specialists believe that this test was con- 
ducted jointly by Israel and South Africa, both of whom refuse to 
sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 

The nuclear ambitions of Tel Aviv and Pretoria bear a mortal 
threat for the peoples of Africa and the Middle East. The reality 
of this threat was emphasised by reports in the international press 
that the Israeli Zionists and South African racists are working 
together with the Taiwanese regime to develop nuclear weapons 
delivery vehicles—cruise missiles with a range of 2,500 kilome- 
tres. 

South Africa and Israel have already been co-operating for 
many years in the fight against the national liberation movement 
of the African peoples. The Zionists sent specialists on combatt- 
ing guerillas to South Africa and have rendered assistance to the 
South African authorities in developing a system of electronic 
surveillance equipped with Israeli devices on the border between 
Namibia and Angola. The South African military is adopting 
the Israeli tactics of permanent aggression against Lebanon in 
its undeclared war against Angola. In the autumn of 1981, Israeli 
Defence Minister Sharon, the leader of the Zionist “hawks”, 
visited the South African racists to impart “experience”. 

The Israeli secret services took deep root in the “Bantustans” 
(homelands) created by the South African racists—mock states 
which had fictitiously been declared “independent”. As the Paris 
magazine Jeune Afrique reported on June 2nd, 1982, Pretoria 
had instructed “specialists” from Tel Aviv to set up puppet police 
forces in the “Bantustans” of Bophuthatswana, Transkei, Siskei 


74 


and Venda. This task is being carried out by 150 Israeli officers 
‘1 close contact with the secret service of South Africa. In the 
“Bantustan”’ of Bophuthatswana, for example, an Israeli general 
by the contrived name of David Isaacson “works” as a technical 
consultant to the puppet President Lucas Mangope.® Bophuthat- 
gvana has a “commercial representation” in Israel, which is 
headed by a former adviser to the Israeli Prime Minister. At the 
end of 1980 Mangope himself travelled to Israel to ask for more 
“specialists” to be sent to his “country”. 

As is known, from the end of the 1950s to the beginning of the 
1970s Israel gave “aid” to more than thirty African states. Zion- 
ist specialists trained many future military dictators of African 
countries and Israeli capital was actively invested in their econ- 
omies. In 1973, however, most of them broke off diplomatic re- 
lations with Israel. The Zionists are today trying once again to 
break into Africa and thrust on it the “Israeli model of develop- 
ment”, i.e. their own neocolonialist rule. Under pressure from 
the USA a number of pro-Western regimes have renewed con- 
tacts with Israel. There are four thousand Israeli consultants and 
experts operating in Black Africa today. In November 1981, Gen- 
eral Sharon visited the Central African Republic, Gabon and 
Zaire, foisting Israeli weapons and military specialists on the Af- 
ricans.°* 

All this bears witness to the fact that Zionism is becoming an 
ever more dangerous weapon of aggressive imperialist circles, 
which are trying to unite all the forces of world reaction for the 
fight with the socialist community and the national liberation 
movement, Zionism has become the junior partner of American 
imperialism in the global strategy of ensuring Washington’s 
domination of the world. 


References 
1-2. Israel Pocket Library. History from 1980. Keter Publishing 
House, Jerusalem, 1973, p. 38. 
3. Christopher Sykes. Crossroads to Israel. Mentor, 1967, p. 22. 


4. Martin Gilbert. Exile and Return. The Emergence of Jew- 
ish Statehood. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1978, 


pp. 109-110. 
77 


. Richard. P. Stevens. Weizman and Smuts. A Study in Zion. 


ist-South African Cooperation. The Institute for Palestine 
Studies, Beirut, 1975, p. 35. 


. Ezekiel Rabinowitz. Justice Louis D. Brandeis. The Zion. 


ist Chapter of His Life. Philosophical Library, N.Y., 1968, 
pp. 112-113. 


7. Political Affairs, July 1971, Vol. 50, No. 7, p. 20. 


1a 


13. 


14. 
15. 


16. 


17. 
18. 
19. 


20. 


21. 


78 


. Arthur Hertzberg. The Zionist Idea. A Historical Analysis 


and Reader. Atheneum, N.Y., 1973, pp. 390-391. 


. Joseph B. Schechtman. The United States and the Jewish 


State Movement. The Crucial Decade: 1939-1949. Her7] 
Press, Thomas Yoseloff, N.Y., 1966, pp. 408-409. 


. Ibid., p. 409. 
i. 


See Howard M. Sachar. A History of Israel. From the Rise 
of Zionism to Our Time. Alfred A. Knopf, N.Y., 1979, 
p. 460. 


See Melvin I. Urofsky. We Are One! American Jewry and 
Israel. Anchor Press, Doubleday Garden City, N.Y., 1978, 
p. 304. 


Anthony Pearson. Conspiracy of Silence. London, 1978, 
p. 72. 


Ibid., p. 73. 


Alfred M. Lilienthal. The Zionist Connection. What Price 
Peace? Dodd, Mead and Company, N.Y., 1978, p. 567. 


See The Aims and Methods of Militant Zionism. Politizdat, 
M., 1971, pp. 67-68, (in Russian). 


Izvestiia, March 4, 1977. 
Ibid. 


The White Book. Evidence, Facts and Documents. Pro- 
gress Publishers, Moscow, 1981, p. 186. 


Gus Hall. Imperialism Today. International Publishers, 
N.Y., 1973, p. 167. 


The Communist Party of Israel. The 19th Congress. Hatfa 
and Nazareth, 11-14 February 1981. Tel Aviv, 1981, p. 252. 


99-24, Arnold Foster and Benjamin R. Epstein. The New Anti- 


25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 
32. 


33. 


34. 
39. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 


Semitism. McGrow-Hill Book Company, N.Y., 1974. 

The New York Times Magazine, January 5, 1975, p. 20. 
See Goldman N. The Jewish Paradox. N.Y., 1978, p. 180. 
The New York Times Magazine, January 5, 1975, p. 22. 


The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. Vol. 2, A Warner Com- 
munication Company, N.Y., 1979, p. 418. 


American Jewish Year Book, 1974-1975. Vol. 75, N.Y., 
1975, p. 213. 


Henry Kissinger. Years of Upheaval. Little, Brown and Com- 
pany, Boston, 1982, p. 250. 


Ibid., p. 254. 


American Jewish Year Book, 1974-1975. Vol. 75, N.Y., 
1975, p. 216. 


Gerald S. Strober. American Jews: Community in Crisis. 
Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1974, 
p. 68. 


The New York Times Magazine, January 5, 1975, p. 26. 
Kissinger H. op. cit., p. 990. 

The New York Times Magazine, January 5, 1975, p. 28. 
Ibidem. 

The New York Times Magazine, January 5, 1975, p. 31. 


American Jewish Year Book, 1976. Vol. 76, The American 
Jewish Committee, N.Y., 1975, p. 163. 


40-41. Philadelphia Inquirer, April 17, 1974. 


42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 


47. 


Ibidem. 

Lilienthal A. op. cit., p. 445. 

Washington Post, September 10, 1977, p. A19. 

Gus Hall. op. cit., p. 168. 

See The New York Times Magazine, November 23, 1975, 
p. 56. 

See Lipset S. (ed.) Emerging Coalitions in American Pol- 


79 


itics. San Francisco, Institute for Contemporary Studie, 
1978, p. 140. | 


48. American Jewish Year Book 1979, Vol. 79, N.Y., The Amer. 
ican Jewish Committee, 1978, p. 167. 


49, Ibid., p. 164. 
50-51. Izvestiia, March 4, 1977. 
52. See The White Book. pp. 220-226. 


53. See American Jewish Year Book 1980, Vol. 80, ‘The Ameri. 
can Jewish Committee, N.Y., 1979, p. 125. 


54. Ibid., p. 126. 


55-56. Norman Podhoretz. Breaking Ranks. A Political Memoir, 
Harper and Row Publishers, New York, London etc., 1979, 
pp. 348-349. 


57. Ibid., p. 351. 


58. Near East Report, May 14, 1982, Vol. XXVI, No. 20, 
p. 95. 


59. Middle East International, No. 153, July 3, 1981, p. 9. 
60-61. See Middle East, No.83, September 1981, p. 24. 

62. See Jeune Afrique, 26 Juillet 1982. 

63. Middle East International, No. 176, June 4, 1982, p. 12. 


Ye. Dmitriev 


THE MIDDLE EAST 
SETTLEMENT IN THE 
CONTEXT 

OF SOVIET-AMERICAN 
RELATIONS AND 

THE ACTIVITIES 

OF INTERNATIONAL ZIONISM 


For decades the situation in the Middle East has resembled a 
pendulum movement. Its non-stop swings were activated by 
changes in the home affairs and in the correlation of the class 
and political forces in the region, the ups and downs in the na- 
tionalist sentiment, the ebb and flow in the Arab national liber- 
ation movement, and by the effect of the USSR and USA poli- 
cies. The extent of the latter impact was largely determined by 
the degree in which the great powers’ moves corresponded to the 
national aspirations of the countries and peoples of the region. 
As a rule, the US moves, dictated by the need to back up the 
annexation policies of Israel, its strategic ally in the region, 
clashed with the national interests of the peoples in the region. The 
latest example and proof of this has been the abrogation by the 
government of Lebanon of the degrading agreement with Israel, 
whose crushing terms had been directly drawn up by the US di- 
plomacy. 

Consequently, the growing nationalist sentiment in the Arab 
world, its evolution and the growing awareness by the Arabs of 
their national current and long-term political objectives must 
be taken into account by all observers of the Middle East situa- 
tion. Disregard of these sentiments showed by the US Adminis- 
tration providing all-round military and political support to Is- 
rael, sometimes even contrary to the USA’s own interests, is the 
cause of the unpopularity, to say the least, of official Washing- 
ton’s policies in the Middle East. Driven by their hegemonistic as- 
pirations, and nurturing far-reaching designs of military and po- 
litical character, US strategists tend to forget that at this stage 
of the Arab world’s development nationalism largely remains a 
motive force, a political doctrine and praxis of a broad spectrum of class and political forces including those in power in Ara} 
countries. This brings to one’s mind the strikingly up-to-date 
comment of Lenin’s that there is always a broader democratic 
content in the nationalism of an oppressed nation. 

It is highly symptomatic in this connection that recent US po. 
litical initiatives in the Middle East caught the Arabs’ attentioy 
only when they contained at least a hint of the US preparednes, 
to consider such aspects of the Middle East settlement vital fo, 
the Arabs as the Palestinian Arabs problem, the discontinuatioy 
of the building of Israeli settlements, the withdrawal of Israel; 
troops from the occupied Arab territories, etc. However, these inj. 
tiatives drew heavy criticism of the Arabs as soon as, after a short 
lapse of time, it became clear that they contain nothing new and 
revolve in the vicious circle of old and stale anti-Arab and anti. 
Palestinian, i.e. pro-Israeli, stereotypes of the US Middle East 
policy. 

It follows that when the US diplomacy refused to take into 
account the nationalist sentiments in the Arab world it commit. 
ted a serious error. An example of this unsound approach is pro- 
vided by attempts to carry on extending a “special”? US-Israeli 
relationship under the conditions of the growing dependence of 
the USA and the West on the oil and petrodollars owned by 
conservative Arab regimes, who are Israel’s avowed political 
enemies. These moves on the part of the USA is closely con- 
nected with its constant attemps to make use of anti-communism 
which, by and large, is not very characteristic of the majority 
of Arab nationalists. 

It is difficult to discern changes and new trends in the world 
through the spectacles of “global confrontation” with the Soviet 
Union. To see communist plots and “the hand of Moscow” 
everywhere and to blame “the Reds” for all developments which 
do not fit in with official Washington’s Procrustean bed means 
to return to the outdated Cold War techniques and to miss the 
true essence of the Middle East realities and their dynamics 
can hardly be called statesmanship or political wisdom. 

The instigators, authors and executors of the US Middle East 
policy made their second serious error when they persisted in 
their blind certitude that, using a large arsenal of military and 
political tools, including ostentatious arm-twisting and economic 
blackmail, and all-round “assistance” of the world Zionism and 


82 


jsrael, the United States will ultimately succeed in ousting the 
Soviet Union from the Middle East and in keeping it away from 
the settlement process and establishing a Pax Americana in the 
region. 

Has the US Administration scored any successes along this 
road? Appearances may be deceptive. Were the Camp David 
deal and the Israeli-Egyptian accord of 26 March 1979 a suc- 
cess or a failure? It has become obvious that these arrangements 
could not and did not bring a solution to the problem of a just 
and stable peace in the Middle East, because they threw the 
settlement process back and created new obstacles in the way of 
the world community’s collective efforts to achieve a compre- 
hensive Middle East settlement. These moves of the US diplo- 
macy made the US Middle East policy dependent on sudden 
unpredictable turns and surprises in which modern Arab history 
has been so rich. One of such surprises was the violent depar- 
ture of President Sadat, America’s most reliable ally in the Arab 
world. An unbiased observer will admit that the tragic end of 
the former Egyptian president’s political career was an inevi- 
table consequence of his unchecked following of US advice on 
the country’s foreign and home policy. Sadat’s sudden departure 
from the Middle East’s political arena demonstrated the fragil- 
ity of the strategic structure of the US Middle East policy and 
the unsoundness of the tactical methods of implementing it. 

These developments have prompted certain US politologists 
to pose the question: Would it not be better to search for a way 
out of the Middle East conflict by putting forward proposals 
acceptable to the Soviet Union, whose role in the region remains 
substantial and in the solution of many elements of the crisis 
situation even a decisive one. To claim that the Soviet Union 
is doomed to “rearguard action” in the region is tantamount to 
ignorance, to say the least, of the characteristic trends in the 
development of the Arab world in the first half of the 1980s. 
A student of the Middle East settlement in the context of So- 
viet-American relations during the past few years immediately 
wonders: Is Soviet-American cooperation in searching for a way 
out of the Middle East crisis possible and on what terms? 

During the past 35 years there have been sporadic instances 
of such cooperation or, as a minimum, parallel Soviet-American 
actions in the Middle East. Both the USSR and the USA pro- 


gt 83 


ceeded from the need to recognise the rights of the Jewish ang 
Arab residents of Palestine under the British mandate to create 
their own independent states. The UN General Assembly Res. 
olution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 laid down the progres. 
sive constitutional groundwork for the future Arab and Jewish 
state entities, established procedures for their creation which 
precluded any infringements, especially with respect to the rights 
of ethnic and religious minorities. The resolution called on the 
two future states to commit themselves to a peaceful foreign 
policy. It stipulated a number of conditions on the fulfilment 
of which depended the recognition of the two would-be states by 
the United Nations. Beyond any doubt, if the implementation 
of the resolution had not been torpedoed by the Palestinian war 
immediately following the proclamation of the state of Israel, as 
a result of which the territory destined for the Arab state was 
divided among Israel, Jordan, and Egypt, the Middle East 
conflict would not have acquired so dangerous proportions and 
Israel would not be able to pursue a permanent annexationist 
policy and to hold the region in a constant state of tension. 

The US endorsement of the 29 November 1947 UN General 
Assembly resolution was one of the few manifestations of the 
US Administration’s preparedness during the Cold War to search 
for solutions of international disputes at the negotiating table. 
However, Washington’s moves to establish a “special” relation- 
ship with Israel could not fail to undermine stability in the 
Middle East. Israel’s aggressive foreign policy, which was made 
possible by the all-round support of the West, primarily the 
USA, corresponded to the interests of the leaders of internation- 
al Zionism who, far from seeking reconciliation of Israel with 
its Arab neighbours, whetted the annexationist appetites of Is- 
rael’s leadership and actively promoted the idea of creating 
“Greater Israel” at the expense of the neighbouring Arab ter- 
ritories. This gradually led many Arab leaders to the realisation 
of the need of cooperation with the Soviet Union. The Arab 
nationalists’ natural desire to seek economic and political inde- 
pendence made them dangerous enemies and even “agents of 
world communism” in the eyes of the US Administration. 

In the second half of the 50s and the first half of the 60s the 
US Administration believed that the Soviet Union’s moves to 
promote Soviet-Arab relations jeopardised US interests in the 


84 


region and posed a threat for pro-Western Arab regimes. In real- 
ity the Soviet Union decided to render broad political, military, 
diplomatic, and economic assistance to many Arab countries 
which stepped on the road of independent development moti- 
vated by the desire to help them in the development of their key 
economic sectors and the creation of a state-owned sector (it is 
worth recalling in this connection of the US refusal to finance 
the construction of the Aswan High Dam in Egypt), and not by 
any “subversive” designs. 

The military setback of the three Arab countries, Egypt, Syria 
and Jordan, as a result of the June 1967 Israeli aggression 
against them, could not halt the process of national and social 
liberation in the Arab East, but it did strengthen the positions 
of those political forces which considered an alliance with the 
West and an end to cooperation with the Soviet Union an in- 
dispensable condition of attaining by the Arabs of a suitable 
settlement of their conflict with Israel. The idea that Washington 
holds the key to the settlement was taken up by those Arab states- 
men who followed in the footsteps of the 1935-1936 French 
bourgeoisie. Similarly to the French right-wing quarters which 
in the mid-30s proclaimed ‘mieux Hitler que le Front Populaire’ 
(better Hitler than the Popular Front), after the June 1967 war 
the ruling quarters of certain Arab countries went on record 
with increasing frequency that anyone is preferable to Nasser, 
for the then Egyptian President embodied for many of them the 
anti-Western main thrust of the Arab nationalism’s ideology and 
political praxis. 

During the search for a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, 
which was aggravated by the Israeli 1967 seizure of a number 
of Arab territories, there were attempts to come up with a joint 
US-Soviet approach to the resolution of a number of concrete 
questions of the Middle East settlement, such as talks between 
US President Johnson and Soviet Premier Kosygin in Glassboro 
and the several rounds of consultations and talks which followed 
the unanimous adoption by the UN Security Council of the 
Resolution 242 of 22 November 1967 for which both the USSR 
and the USA voted. At the time, the Soviet-US negotiations on 
the Middle East took place in a situation difficult for the USA 
and the USSR. It was difficult for the USA because Washing- 
ton’s prime foreign policy concern was the Vietnam war, and 


85 


it was difficult for the USSR because, primarily concerned wit}, 
the need to secure the withdrawal of Israeli troops from aj 
occupied territories, the leaders of the Arab countries which 
were victims of the 1967 Israeli aggression were largely not re. 
ceptive to Soviet advice on other, no less important aspects 
of the settlement problem: the need to search for a constructive 
solution of a Palestinian problem, the importance of recognis. 
ing the fact of Israel’s existence, etc. Refusing to accept the pro. 
visions of the UN Security Council’s Resolution 242 and shaping 
its policies correspondingly, Israel’s leadership aggravated the 
situation and heightened the tensions in the region. The anti. 
Soviet and anti-Arab actions of international Zionism acquired 
unprecedented proportions, along with the Zionist pressure on 
the White House. 

The cause of the settlement was hardly helped by the openly 
pro-Israeli character of a number of American moves at the time 
and the complete absence of a will to search for a balanced so- 
lution in official Washington which manifested itself in the 
undisguised negative attitude to the Soviet proposals of 31 De. 
cember 1968, 17 June 1969, and these made at quadripartite 
consultations in the Security Council in the spring-autumn of 
1969, at the multi-stage Soviet-American consultations in the 
spring of 1969 in Washington and in the summer of 1969 in 
Moscow, during the visit of Deputy Secretary of State Sisko, 
and in the autumn of 1969 in New York and Washington. 

A typical example of the US position at the time was the so- 
called Rogers Plan—a ceasefire (on the Suez Canal) and “the 
freezing of the situation”. Explaining the provisions of the plan, 
the then US Secretary of State pointed out that “‘to call for 
Israeli withdrawal as envisaged in the UN resolution without 
achieving agreement on peace would be partisan toward the 
Arabs. To call on the Arabs to accept peace without Israeli 
withdrawal would be partisan toward Israel”. He added that, 
“a peace agreement between the parties must be based on clear 
and stated intentions and a willingness to bring about basic 
changes in the attitudes and conditions which are characteristic 
of the Middle East today’.t Moscow assessed the Rogers Plan 
as a departure of sorts by Washington from the openly pro-Is- 
raeli position. 

Egypt is known to have accepted the Rogers Plan, which 


86 


provoked a wave of protest in the Arab world and especially 
among the Palestinian Arabs. Before deciding to accept the plan 
President Nasser held consultations with the Soviet leadership. 
If Moscow had really believed that anything emanating from 
Washington is evil, the Soviet Union would certainly have been 
capable of preventing Egypt from accepting the Rogers Plan. 
The Soviet Union, however, refrained from adopting such a 
simplistic attitude, because it had always proceeded from the 
fact that each step designed to reduce the tensions in the Middle 
East dangerous for the world peace no matter where it originat- 
ed from, ought not to be rejected out of hand but must be 
carefully studied and taken into account in specific policy 
moves. 

All attempts, therefore, to ascribe expansionist designs vis-a-vis 
the Middle East to the Soviet Union or accuse it of trying to 
reach a settlement which would give it “unilateral advantages” 
would be in bad faith. The principle of justice for all has always 
been the fundamental one in the Soviet Middle East policy. 
This much has been recognised even by the leaders of Israel, 
a country with which the USSR severed diplomatic relations on 
10 June 1967. 

The shortlived drawing closer of the USSR and US positions 
on the basis of the approval by both of the UN Security Council 
Resolution 242 gave way to a long period of diplomatic ma- 
noeuvring during which the positions of the two countries drew 
wide apart again. After 1967, aware that the abnormal situation 
in the Middle East, described as “neither war, nor peace”, might 
ultimately bring about a new outbreak of hostilities, the Soviet 
Government repeatedly called on the US Administration to show 
itself equal to the enormous responsibility which rests on the 
great powers in the matter of the Middle East settlement. The 
May 1972 and June 1973 Soviet-American summits showed that 
Washington was not particularly concerned about the Middle 
East situation and viewed the negative impact of the Israeli 
occupation of Arab lands on the domestic politics in a number 
of Arab countries as a gratuitous possibility of pressuring these 
countries into taking decisions suitable for the West. 

In these conditions the leadership of Israel and international 
Zionism maintained its openly obstructionist stand towards a 
Middle East settlement, continuing to disregard numerous res- 


87 


olutions of the UN Security Council and the General Assembly 
and doing everything to upset all efforts of the internation, 
community aimed at a just political settlement of the Midd), 
East conflict. 

The continuing tensions and instability in the region lookeg 
as an anachronism against the background of a turn toward, 
detente in international relations in 1972-1973. 

Mounting tensions in the Middle East added fuel to the 
growing and ever wider discontent in the Arab world about the 
Arab governments’ reluctance to use force to resolve once and 
for all the key questions of the settlement, that of the Israel 
troops’ withdrawal from the occupied Arab lands. The appeal; 
to find a cardinal military solution to the Middle East problem 
were not accidental. In other words, the talk about the need for 
armed struggle against Israel was moved to a practical plane and 
willingly or unwillingly pushed the Arab leaders toward resolute 
measures in the Middle East settlement. 

The October War could have taken place earlier. Even casual 
observers of the Middle East affairs had no doubts that a new 
Arab-Israeli war, a much more bitter and destructive one than 
the three preceding ones, would break out sooner or later. It was 
hardly to be expected that the Arabs would reconcile themselves 
to the usurping of their rights and the seizure by Israel of ter- 
ritories which had been theirs from time immemorial. 

Against a broader background of contemporary international 
relations the events of October 1973 in the Middle East were, 
as it were, the most serious test of the viability and soundness 
of the USSR’s consistent policy of international detente. It is 
clear that the consequences for the world would have been 
disastrous had it not been for the favourable prerequisites that 
had shaped by that time for better Soviet-US relations and the 
positive changes in them as a result of the talks of Soviet leaders 
with President Nixon in 1972-1973. It was brought home to the 
world that the USSR and the USA were not the only ones to 
benefit from a normalisation and improvement of the Soviet-US 
relations. This process creates qualitatively new conditions for the 
development of contemporary international relations, when the 
still smouldering seats of military tension can and must be elim- 
inated by joint efforts of the great powers. The process of inter- 
national detente and positive shifts in US-Soviet relations during 


88 


October 1973 events were subjected to a serious test and stood 
it well. 

It is to be deplored that the past tense has to be used when 
speaking of the process of the improvement of Soviet-American 
relations. Blinded by pathological anti-Sovietism, the Reagan 
Administration has driven away the very thought of such an im- 

rovement. 

Immediately following the end of the October War in the 
Middle East, on the initiative of the USSR and the USA and 
as a result of the talks between Secretary of State Henry Kis- 
singer and the Soviet leaders in Moscow, the Security Council 
adopted several important resolutions including Resolution 338 
on the convocation of an international conference on the Middle 
East. Kissinger’s Moscow visit was crowned with an agreement 
on the Soviet-US co-chairmanship at the Geneva Peace Confer- 
ence on the Middle East. The significance of the Soviet-US 
co-chairmanship at the conference lies in the fact that the two 
countries committed themselves and showed preparedness to 
jointly influence the developments in the Middle East and the 
progress at the Geneva Peace Conference in order to enable the 
belligerents to attain a reasonable and mutually acceptable so- 
lution over the whole range of the settlement problems, not only 
that of troops disengagement. Closely related to the co-chair- 
manship problem was the question of the future Soviet-American 
guarantees of the settlement which were to become part and par- 
cel of the settlement process and be included as such in the 
documents which would provide the institutional framework for 
the settlement in accordance with international law. 

The Soviet Union felt that the main purpose of the Geneva 
Peace Conference was precisely to work out documents which 
would be binding on all sides in the conflict and create a firm 
groundwork for the Middle East settlement under international 
law. The implementation of these documents which, it goes with- 
out saying, had to be acceptable for all interested parties, could 
create conditions for a durable and stable normalisation of the 
Middle East situation. 

Such a course of events, however, was not to the liking of 
Israel’s leaders. It seemed that Egypt’s and Syria’s military poten- 
tial, restored with Soviet assistance, the greater combat readiness 
of their armed forces, and Israel’s grave losses in the October 


89 


War seemingly kept the Israeli leaders from overt moves to torpe. 
do the efforts aimed at building balanced peace in the Middle 
East. Such a view, however, proved to be misleading. It became 
known later that on the eve of the opening of the Geneva Con. 
ference on 20 December 1973 Israel and the USA reached a cop. 
fidential arrangement under which the US side committed itself 
to consulting Israel on all matters concerning its interests and to 
bring its stand at the conference in full accord with Tel Aviy’s 
line. 

However, no one knew about the arrangement at the time 
and as a result optimism reigned in the corridors and halls of the 
Geneva Palais des Nations. 

One might wonder: why did Israel decide to attend the 
Geneva Conference at all? Was this a proof of its renunciation of 
its policy of annexation and aggression towards its Arab neigh. 
bours? It is common knowledge that the October War was a 
serious blow to the myth of the Israeli army’s invincibility. The 
Arab leaders’ stand was that the Geneva Conference was not 
talks between the victors and the defeated but between equal 
partners who seek peace in the region. However, peace on a 
mutually acceptable basis was not something that the Israeli 
leadership really wanted. Although after the October War the 
positions of political forces in Israel which voiced preparedness 
to seek and to find a way out of the conflict with the Arab neigh- 
bours grew stronger, Israel’s leadership did not part with its far- 
reaching annexationist designs, and a certain drawing closer of 
the USSR and US positions on the situation in the Middle East, 
and ways of normalising it, did not suit it at all. 

However, the drawing closer of the USSR and US positions 
on the settlement was a shortlived one. Doctor Kissinger’s highly 
publicised step by step policy adopted by the US Administration 
was nothing but an attempt to impose separate deals with Israel 
on the Arabs, something the Soviet side naturally could not ac- 
cept. Moscow correctly saw through the ‘shuttle diplomacy’ as an 
undisguised attempt to keep the Soviet Union out of the settle- 
ment process. The US side did not even think it necessary to try 
to convince the Soviet side to the contrary. 

More than that, the Camp David deal confirmed the Soviet 
Union’s worst misgivings, namely that official Washington would 
consider “the Camp David peace-building process” as a sort of 


90 


Ks peak” of efforts to establish constructive peace in the region. 
This is what really happened. The US Administration found it- 
self a hostage of its own propaganda which claimed that Camp 
David had brought long sought peace to the Middle East and 
that the rest was a matter of technique. 

In reality genuine peace in the Middle East is even further 
off today than at the time of the signing of the Camp David 
accords, while “the peaceful victory” of Carter, Begin, and Sa- 
dat only added to the tensions in the region. This view has been 
borne out by the summer 1982 Israeli aggression against Lebanon 
and new outbreaks of violence in Lebanon as a consequence of 
the US and Israeli interference in the internal affairs of that 
country, as well as several other developments. The US military 
build-up in the Middle East, numerous demonstrations of the 
US naval and air strength in the area, and attempts at joint US- 
Israeli military and political pressure on Syria are hardly condu- 
cive to the normalisation of the situation in the region. 

Unfortunately, after Camp David, most US experts in the 
Middle East, scholars and practical workers alike, adopted a view 
that the Soviet Union’s Middle East policy stands in the way of 
efforts (one might wonder whose efforts) to establish construc- 
tive peace there. Writings by US authors on the mythical “So- 
viet threat” to the Middle East are as many as they are lacking 
in substantive proof. The alleged threat was the main topic of 
Alexander Haig’s talks with certain Arab leaders in the spring of 
1981 during which the US Secretary of State tried to talk his in- 
terlocutors into accepting the “strategic consensus” idea, that is an 
alliance of the region’s conservative regimes on an openly anti- 
Soviet basis. 

Making much of the alleged Soviet threat in talks with Arab 
statesmen and in its propaganda campaign, the USA proceeds 
from a patently unsound premise that the Camp David “lock- 
pick” in combination with the Reagan Plan, which immediately 
followed the Israeli aggression in Lebanon in September 1982, 
can bring about a radical change in the Middle East and create 
a situation there which would be favourable for the implementa- 
tion of Washington’s imperial ambitions and suitable to its main 
strategic ally—Israel. US officials and politologists specialising in 
Middle Eastern affairs repeatedly went on record to this effect. 
One of them, Professor of the University of Chicago Leonard Bin- 


at 


der, wrote in Current History, “The rationale for our emerging 
Middle East policy is to prevent the Soviet Union from challeng. 
ing American political predominance in the region. We do no 
wish to share power or responsibility in the region with the So. 
viet Union. We should like to make sure that the countries allieq 
with the Soviets switch to our camp or are prevented fron 
exercising any influence beyond their boundaries... We should 
like to see a comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli dispute, 
but we do not wish to pursue such a solution in an internationg] 
forum in which the Soviet Union would enjoy equal status with 
us.”? 

US officials repeatedly expressed themselves in the same vein, 
“It is the Soviet presence in the Middle East which most con. 
cerns us now,” stressed, for example, Under-Secretary of Defence 
for Policy Fred C. Ikle. “Our objective now is to confront this 
situation, and effectively to develop and deploy countervailing 
power. We wish ultimately to stand there, and from there to 
project force against those who invaded Afghanistan.”* Using the 
pretext of the alleged “Soviet threat” and fully backed up by 
Israel’s leadership in a relapse of the Cold War syndrome, the 
USA tries to set up its military bases in the Middle East and to 
create a military infrastructure there which is far in excess in the 
military requirements of the states in the region and is spearhead- 
ed against the USSR. 

However, these attempts have run into the opposition of not 
only the peoples but also many leaders of the Middle East states, 
who are aware that by making military concessions to the United 
States they would automatically set off their countries to the So- 
viet Union, subjecting them to a grave military and political risk. 

It might be objected that the US side did take steps which 
could be described as preparedness to search jointly with the 
Soviet Union for a way out of the Middle East crisis. One ol 
such steps, according to many observers, was the Joint Soviet- 
American Statement on the Middle East of October 1977. True, 
this document does not fit the, alas, familiar pattern of the tradi- 
tionally pro-Israeli US Middle East policy. The document said 
among other things that constructive efforts of the USSR and 
the USA were necessary to build peace in the region on an 
equitable basis acceptable to all. 

It would seem that if the Israeli leaders really wanted balanced 


92 


cace in the Middle East they should have hailed this document. 
However, that was not the reaction of official Israel and the 
jeadership of international Zionist organisations. 

Israeli leadership assessed the statement as a national catas- 
trophe. Menachem Begin was promptly hospitalised, which, ac- 
cording to his physician, was a consequence of the Soviet-Americ- 
an statement. 

An extraordinary session of the Conference of Presidents of 
Major American Jewish Organisations was urgently convened 
‘, the USA. In a cable to Secretary of State Cyrus Vans, Rabbi 
Alexander M. Schindler, Chairman of the Conference, described 
the statement as “an abandonment of America’s historic commit- 
ment to the security and survival of Israel”.* A group of pro- 
Israeli senators: Moynihan, Dole, Jackson, Javits, Case and Baker 
expressed concern over the Soviet-American statements. 

The Carter Administration’s capitulation before the country’s 
Zionists was prompt and across the board. Four days later the 
talks between Dayan and President Carter were followed by the 
so-called US-Israeli working document which fully nullified the 
Soviet-American agreement of October 1. 

The political horizon has been overcast ever since, and for 
many years already ithere has not been a ray of light in the 
Soviet-American cooperation in the Middle East, largely owing 
to the Zionists’ efforts. As before, those in Washington’s corridors 
of power are actively debating the need for a “strategic consen- 
sus” of the pro-Western Arab regimes and Israel] on an openly 
anti-Soviet basis. The Reagan Administration relegated to obliv- 
ion President Nixon’s piece of advice given at the 25th (anniver- 
sary) Session of the UN General Assembly in September 1970 
and which has lost none of its topicality: “It is essential that we 
and the Soviet Union join the efforts towards avoiding war in 
the Middle East and also towards developing a climate in which 
the nations of the Middle East will learn to live and let live. 
It is essential, not only in the interest of the people in the Middle 
East themselves, but also because the alternative could be a 
confrontation with disastrous consequences for the Middle East, 
for our nations, and for the whole world.’”® 

The following question, important from the practical and 
theoretical standpoints suggests itself: Why was the US Adminis- 
tration prepared at certain periods to take joint steps with the 


93 


Soviet Union in the Middle East settlement and to what degrep 
was this preparedness genuine? The answer in all probability 
would be as follows: when the makers and the executors of the 
US Middle East policy saw that it entered into a contradiction 
dangerous for the US, with the Middle East realities, something 
fraught with a complete loss of the US positions in the region, 
when even most reliable US allies in the region refused to do 
Washington’s bidding, when the US policy in the region showed 
patent weaknesses, only then did Washington recall that by pay. 
ing lip service to meeting the Soviet position half-way it is 
easy “to let off steam” and to convince the world and Arab public 
that the USA is prepared to cooperate with the USSR in attain. 
ing peace in the Middle East. 

There are numerous examples of this approach: the US 
representative cast his vote for the UN Security Council Resolu- 
tion 242 only when the Arabs’ indignation with Israel’s refusal to 
withdraw its troops from the territories occupied in 1967 reached 
a critical point; agreement on joint action with the USSR within 
the framework of an international conference was reached only 
when the outcome of the October War largely shook the myth 
of Israel’s military “invincibility” and gave the Arab peoples con- 
fidence that through joint efforts and unity on an anti-imperial- 
ist basis they can and must compel Israel give up its policies of 
annexation and war towards its Arab neighbours; the Soviet-US 
1 October 1977 statement on the Middle East was an undisguised 
attempt by the US side to divest itself of responsibility for its 
traditionally negative attitude to the Palestinian settlement 
which remains the heart of and the key to the entire Middle 
East settlement. 

The following conclusions can be drawn from the above 
discussion: 

1. Preparedness for joint positive actions with the USA in the 
Middle East has been a permanent factor of the Soviet policy 
in this hot spot of the planet. At the same time Washington’s 
claim to be the only “mediator” in the Middle East conflict and 
its intention to build up its military presence in the region with 
a view to imposing a Pax Americana on the Arab countries, to 
provide all-round support to any actions by Israel and to transfer 
the Middle East conflict into the sphere of “global Soviet- 
American confrontation” is a political vicious circle with no 


94 


visible way out. The US Administration’s desire to exploit the 
Camp David accords “to the hilt” is in conflict with the real 
political trends in the region and doomed to failure. 

9. The six points of the Soviet position, set forth on 15 Septem- 
ber 1982° remain the foundation of the Soviet Middle East 
policy. An impartial observer will agree that in their entirety 
they are based on the principle of equality for all. ‘This principle 
must underlie an equitable, comprehensive, and lasting Middle 
Fast settlement. 

3, A practical consequence of the US failure to act on the 
mentioned agreements with the Soviet Union on certain aspects 
of the Middle East situation is that morally, politically, and 
legally the Soviet Union can consider itself free of any commit- 
ments with respect to the USA on bilateral and multilateral 
agreements and arrangements on the Middle East settlement, 
and as a consequence the Soviet side would be justified to take 
any action in the region regardless of Washington’s reaction. In 
other words, if the USA continues to break “the rules of the 
game” and seek to undermine the positions of the Soviet Union 
and its friends in the Middle East, nothing will prevent the 
USSR to take steps which would make the position of the USA 
and its friends and allies in the region a critical one. 

It seems that obsessed with its desire to curb the Arab national 
liberation movement and to split it from other progressive forces, 
Washington has lost touch with the Middle East realities and is 
blind to the fact that the region is on the threshold of serious 
class, political, and social change, that it is ripe for the collapse 
of outdated political and state and legal structures and that this 
collapse will inevitably create conditions which will spell the end 
of imperialism’s and Zionism’s plans to perpetuate Middle East 
as their “reservation” . 

4. One of the prime objectives of Israel and international 
Zionism is to prevent the drawing closer of the USSR and the 
USA positions on the Middle East settlement and to keep the 
region in a permanent state of tension. Israel’s leadership warns 
the US Administration that a Soviet-American “condominium” 
in the Middle East would inevitably result in the weakening of 
Israel, without whose support the entire US Middle East policy 
would collapse like a house of cards. As a result, the leadership 
of Israel and international Zionism have a particular stake in 


95 


preserving permanent tensions in the Middle East. These tensions 
in turn help the US leadership to use the pretext of countering 
‘Soviet threat” in order to build up US military presence in the 
region, which is fraught with grave consequences for peace in 
the world. 


References 


1. Quoted from The Department of State Bulletin, 1970, 
Vol. LXII, No. 1593, January 5, pp. 8, 9. 


2. Leonard Binder, “United States Policy in the Middle East; 
Toward a Pax Saudiana”, Current History, 1982, Vol. 81, 
No. 471, January, p. 42. 


3. Address by Fred C. Ikle, Under-Secretary of Defense for 
Policy, before the American-Israeli Public Affairs Commit- 
tee, May 18, 1981, Official Text, May 20, 1981, p. 3. 


4. The New York Times, October 3, 1977, p. 6. 


5. UN General Assembly, Session 25th, N. Y., 1970, Official 
Records, Vol. II, 1974, p. 6. 


6. Pravda, 16 September 1982. 


L. Dadiani 


ZIONIST-ISRAELI 
HEGEMONISM: PAST 
AND PRESENT 


In its 14 December 1979 resolution On the Inadmissibility of 
the Policy of Hegemonism in International Relations the UN 
General Assembly condemned, among other forms of regional 
hegemonism, the adventurist expansionist policies of Israel’s 
ruling quarters in the Middle East. For many decades Zionists 
have sought to impose their hegemony on the region and win 
a special role for themselves in the solution of regional problems. 
In the conduct of this hegemonistic policy Zionist leaders make 
active use of a ramified network of international Zionist organisa- 
tions associated with the World Zionist Organisation—the Jewish 
Agency for Israel (WZO—JA) and the World Jewish Congress 
(WJC).* The Zionist-Israeli hegemony has its ideological roots 
in the Zionist dogma about the existence of an extraterritorial, 
“special”, “world Jewish nation”, about the Jews being “God’s 
chosen people”, the special historic predestination of the Jews 
and “anti-Semitism’s primordiality”’. 

“We might boast of some good qualities”, said, for example, 
M. Nordau, an ideologist of Zionism, “which do not pertain to 
any other nation to the same extent.”* In his writings the founder 
of so-called “spiritual Zionism”? Ahad Ha’Am referred to the 
Jews as a “supernation”, a “treasure people”, the “aristocracy of 
history”, a “kingdom of priests and a people of saints” which 
among other peoples “represents a genuinely supreme type of 
humankind”. He also wrote of the Jews’ “ethical genius’.® Re- 
turning time and again to the myth of “Jewish exclusiveness”’, 


* WZO-JA has branches in over 40 countries and WJC in over 60. 
The WZO membership includes about 20 international Zionist organ- 
isations ranging from ultra-right and pro-fascist to “left-wing social- 
ist”? ones. the late honorary WJC President N. Goldman, a prominent figure 
in international Zionism, claimed, “The Jewish people is a UNigque 
historical being. It is a people, a religion, a race and the bearer 
of a particular civilization and no term from among the non. 
Jewish terms, such as ‘people’, ‘nation’ or ‘religion’, can Properly 
define that particular phenomenon which is named the Jewish 
people in history... Three basic elements characterize it: j,, 
being an international people, its being connected with Palestine 
and its being, in the general historical respect, one of the groups 
which are not identifiable in world history.” 

The concept of “Jewish state on the land of forefathers” hold, 
a special place in Zionist ideology. Flying in the face of irrefy. 
table facts, Zionist propaganda tries to portray the imperialist, 
racist and clerical state of Israel as an “egalitarian’’, “especially 
democratic” and almost “socialist” one.® For example, a propagan. 
da booklet put out in Tel Aviv in 1958 claims: the small state of 
Israel is of absolutely exceptional interest, because it combines 
features of a traditional and a revolutionary state. In this sense jt 
is unique, unmatched by any other state in the world. On the 
one hand it tries to pick up the broken threads and to revive old, 
seemingly irretrievably lost, values. On the other, it is a state of 
a New Start, pursuing on a revolutionary scale an unprecedented 
challenge or a social Utopia of a special kind.® 

Since Zionism’s inception its ideologists and leaders have been 
hammering home their own versions of the racist theories of the 
West’s “civilizing mission” in the East and the “white man’s 
burden”. T. Herzl, for one, repeatedly wrote that in Palestine 
Zionists should build an “outpost of civilization as opposed to 
barbarism”, form a “portion of the rampart of Europe against 
Asia” and “an outpost of Western culture” on this shortest road 
to Asia.’ In short, proclaiming itself a “national-liberation move- 
ment” and a “Jewish revolution”, from the very outset Zionism 
revealed its bourgeois-nationalist, pro-imperialist and colonialist 
essence. Addressing the 2nd Zionist Congress in 1898, T. Herzl 
was specific enough on this point: “...the English were the first 
to recognize the necessity of colonial expansion in the modern 
world... And therefore I believe the Zionist idea, which is a 
colonial idea, must be understood in England easily and quickly.” 
M. Nordau, T. Herzl’s closest associate, stressed in his speech at 
the 7th Zionist Congress in 1905 that Zionism could assume the 


98 


task of the struggle against the Arabs’ national-liberation move- 
ment.° 

It must be noted that such offers made by Zionist leaders fully 
corresponded with the British ruling quarters’ imperial interests. 
For example, a 9 December 1918 memorandum of the British 
General Staff stressed: “The creation of a buffer Jewish state in 
Palestine, though this State will be weak in itself, 1s strategically 
desirable for Great Britain.”?° After the British Cabinet’s Balfour 
Declaration’! (2 November 1917) and the League of Nation’s 
mandate to Britain to govern Palestine (24 July 1922) the Zion- 
‘st colonization of the country entered a new stage. Proclaiming 
the Jews’ “historical” and even “divine” right to Palestine and 
posing as “fighters against anti-Semitism” and “saviours of the 
Jewish people”, Zionists proceeded to lay a chauvinist-racist 
foundation of their state in “the Holy Land”. 

On the eve of and during World War II Zionists gradually 
reoriented themselves towards the USA as the leading power in 
the capitalist world, while preserving their links with Britain’s 
ruling quarters. In the late 30s-early 40s the centre of interna- 
tional Zionism moved from Europe to the USA. This contributed 
to the forging and strengthening of an alliance between American 
imperialism, which had set its sights on world hegemony, and 
Zionism, which relied on Washington’s assistance in the attain- 
ment of its hegemonistic goals in the Middle East. In a 5 May 
1943 letter to President Roosevelt his personal representative 
General Patrick J. Hurley reported from Cairo that the programme 
of the Zionist organization in Palestine called for “Jewish lead- 
ership for the whole Middle East in the fields of economic de- 
velopment and control.”*” 

Regarding Zionism as one of the main tools of attaining their 
hegemonistic objectives in the world, including the Middle East, 
the US ruling quarters invariably accorded considerable support 
to the Zionist leaders. Steering a course towards world hegemony 
and imposing a Pax Americana on all peoples, US imperialism 
has viewed Israel as its main outpost in the Middle East, although 
it has also sought to use pro-Western Arab regimes in its interests. 
For their part, seeking to build a “Pax Israelica” in the Middle 
East, Israel’s ruling quarters and the international Zionist leaders 
readily agreed to make “the Jewish state” an imperialist outpost 
in the region. As far back as in 1948, Secretary of Defense 


7* 99 


L. Johnson claimed that “Israel is important strategically”, ang 
as a consequence the USA “must support her’.** For his pay 
Israel’s Foreign Minister M. Sharett said in 1952, “... The active 
participation of the Jews [meaning Zionists] of the USA in the 
building of our state is conditioned on the integration of Israe|’, 
foreign policy into the global policy of Washington.”’** 

Twenty years later, in 1973, Israel’s Prime Minister G. Mei; 
was more explicit about Israel’s strategic importance for the USA. 
“Israel is really a safeguard for the maintenance of American ip. 
terests in the area, and the first line of defense [i.e. penetration 
and consolidation—L.D.] for American interests in the Mediterran. 
ean basin.” G. Meir went on to stress that Israel lays claim toa spe. 
cial role in the Middle East, asserting that the country is “the 
main safeguard for the protection of the Islamic regimes that 
are loyal to them [the USA] in the area.”?° 

Let us have a look at history and follow step by step how the 
alliance of Tel Aviv and Washington was formed and strength- 
ened. It is a matter of record that back in 1949 Ben-Gurion, the 
first Israeli head of state, put forward the idea of forming a form- 
al alliance between the state of Israe] and imperialism’s forces,"° 
During his May 1951 visit to the USA Ben-Gurion thus defined 
the policies of Israel’s ruling quarters: “Israel has always been and 
will remain on the side of the Western powers.”*? 1952 saw the 
signing of an agreement on the granting of a US loan to Israel 
and a military agreement which remained secret until 1961. Start- 
ing with 1951 Israel repeatedly offered the USA and Great 
Britain to sign a military pact. In 1955 she expressed prepared- 
ness to permit US bases on her territory and in subsequent years 
pushed for a Mediterranean military alliance under the US 
aegis. 

However, at the time the US ruling quarters saw no need for 
a formal military pact, because Israel was clearly increasingly 
in the wake of the US foreign policy: Israel’s government sup- 
ported the creation of the Baghdad Pact (February 1955) and 
the Eisenhower doctrine (January 1957); which were spearhead- 
ed against the national-liberation movement in the Middle East. 

When the national-patriotic anti-imperialist forces in Syria 
strengthened their positions in 1957, Israel’s leaders claimed that 
the country had turned into a “base for international Commu- 
nism”. Calling on the White House to act resolutely, Ben-Gurion 


100 


wrote to Secretary of State John F. Dulles, “...I believe the 
free world ought not to accept this situation. Everything depends 
on the firm and determined line taken by the United States.”*® 
At the time, Washington was planning to launch a direct in- 
tervention against Syria using the armed forces of neighbouring 
states, primarily Turkey and Israel. The firm support of the 
Syrian people by the Soviet Union and the progressive interna- 
tional public thwarted the aggressive plan. 

In July 1958 Israel gave her unconditional support for the 
landing of US troops in Lebanon and British troops in Jordan. 
What is more, the Israeli government was prepared to help im- 
perialism crush the popular uprising in Lebanon. British troops 
jn Jordan were moved and supplied through Israeli territory. 

Since the proclamation of the state of Israel, Middle East has 
been the scene of five wars. As a result of the 1948-1949 Arab- 
Israeli war Israel annexed 6,600 square kilometers of the territory 
destined to the Palestinian Arab state under a UN resolution. In 
October 1956 Israeli troops occupied the Sinai Peninsula, while 
Britain and France landed troops in the Suez Canal area. The 
main aim of the Tripartite Aggression against Egypt was the 
overthrow of the progressive Nasser regime. Owing to the decisive 
support rendered to Egypt by the Soviet Union, other countries 
of the socialist community, the peoples of the Arab East and 
other anti-imperialist forces, the Suez adventure ended in a 
complete fiasco. In the spring of 1957 Israel had to withdraw her 
troops from the Sinai Peninsula. In view of the aggressor’s in- 
ternational isolation and making tactical advances to the Arabs, 
the United States thought it wise at the time to abstain from 
open manifestation of support for its allies. 

During the June 1967 Israeli aggression against Arab countries, 
which had been prepared with the most active participation of 
government agencies and intelligence services of the USA and 
several other NATO countries, another attempt was made to 
overthrow the progressive regime of Nasser and to simultaneous- 
ly unseat the anti-imperialist government of Syria. The 1967 war 
showed that the USA had definitively put its stake on Israel, 
regarding her as its main ally in the Middle East. By that time, 
under the cover of the demagogical slogan of “promoting”’ de- 
colonization, US imperialism had consolidated its positions in the 
Middle East at the expense of the traditional colonial powers, 


101 


England and France, and emerged as “enemy No. 1” of the Arah 
liberation movement. 

As a result of the 1967 aggression Israel occupied large chunks 
of Egypt (the Sinai Peninsula), and Syria (the Golan Heights), 
as well as the West Bank of the Jordan River, East Jerusalem and 
the Gaza Strip. The total area of the Arab territories occupied by 
Israel was 60,000 sq. km., or four times the area given to 
Israel by the UN resolution on the partition of Palestine. 

It must be emphasized in this connection that Israel’s Declara- 
tion of Independence of 14 May 1948 referred to the whole of 
Palestine, two thirds of whose population were Arabs, as the 
“land of Israel”, while the borders of the state of Israel were 
not delineated.!® This was not a political oversight. In 1951! 
Israel’s Prime Minister Ben-Gurion stressed, “We have set up 
a dynamic State, bent upon expansion. Our state was created 
in a part of our small country.”?° In 1969 Ben-Gurion claimed 
that Israel had settled only 20 per cent of its land.”* 

Intoxicated by its successes in the Six Day War, official Tel 
Aviv and international Zionist leaders decided that their plans 
to impose Israeli hegemony on the Middle East were close to frui- 
tion. Relying upon all-round support of imperialist powers, pri- 
marily the USA, as well as on financial and economic assistance 
of Jewish big bourgeoisie, Israel’s rulers thought that there was 
nothing left for the Arabs but accept “peace” on Israeli terms. 
What Israel was after was to build her relations with the coun- 
tries in the region on the old pattern of US hegemony. Israeli 
Foreign Minister A. Eban wrote back in the 50s that Israel 
aspires for relationships with her Arab neighbours “akin to the re- 


lationship between the United States and the Latin American 


continent.’’?? 


Pursuing this objective, Israel’s ruling quarters, with US back- 
ing, transformed the country into a vast arsenal. Beginning with 
1948 Israel accounted for one tenth, and after 1967 about 25 
per cent of all US foreign aid. Through official channels alone in 
1948 through to 1982 Tel Aviv received 495.3 billion from 
Washington: $10 billion as military loans, $6.8 billion and $5.7 
billion respectively as free military and economic aid, and remain- 
ing $2.8 billion as credits for economic development. According 
to certain sources, if one takes into account donations and loans 
of all sorts of Zionist and pro-Zionist organizations, the total US 


102 


gnancial assistance to Israel topped the $60 billion mark in 1983. 
In the 1984 fiscal year* Washington allocated $2.7 billion in as- 
sistance to Israel, $225 million more than in the preceding year. 
$1.7 billion of the total has been appropriated as military aid to 
Israel. 

For the 1985 fiscal year the US administration intends to seek 
congressional approval of $1.4 billion worth of completely free 
military aid to Tel Aviv. The Washington Post reported on 2] 
December 1983 that President Reagan had promised Israel’s 
leaders another increase in military aid in fiscal 1986. 

As a rule, states receiving military aid from the USA are 
obliged to buy American weapons, which, firstly, boosts the arms 
manufacturers’ orders, and, secondly, makes the countries in- 
creasingly dependent on Washington. However, the USA made 
a generous concession to its “strategic ally”: $550 million of the 
total financial assistance received by Israel in fiscal year 1984 
is to be spent on the production of Israel-designed sophisticated 
jet fighter-bomber. 

The practice of writing off Israel’s military and other debts is 
becoming increasingly common. For example, in 1974-1983 the 
USA relieved Israel of the need to pay $5.5 billion in debt. In 
1984 Israel received a $750 million subsidy from the United 
States. 

The USA, which accounts for two thirds of Israel’s arms 1m- 
ports, supplies its client state and ally with the most up-to-date 
weapons which are sometimes not available even to NATO 
members. In fiscal 1983 Israel bought $2.5 billion worth of US 
war materiel. She also spends enormous sums of money on the 
domestic production of modern weaponry. As a result, direct mil- 
itary spending alone constitutes 30-31 per cent of the country’s 
gross national product. The inclusion of debt servicing and other 
indirect spending “for security purposes” boosts the military bill 
to almost two thirds of the national budget. 

Militarism permeates all spheres of life in Israel. 24 per cent of 
the country’s able-bodied population (between the ages of 18 
and 45) serve in the army. Eleven per cent are on the rolls of 
the police and intelligence agencies, and 15 per cent are employed 
in the military industry. According to Le Monde Diplomati- 
que, in Israel “the army’s influence is decisive in the life of in- 


* In Israel the fiscal year starts on 1 April. 


103 


dividuals and in the national economy”.** The armed force 
disproportionate size and influence in Israel’s state structure stem, 
from her continuing aggressive foreign policy with its annexa. 
tionist main thrust. 

Lebanon has long been a target of Israeli expansionism. Alreaq 
the Ist WZO Congress (1897) laid claim to a part of Leba. 
non’s territory and the Litani River was proclaimed to be the 
natural northern border of the Jewish state. Since the proclama. 
tion of the state of Israel Lebanon has been the butt of non-stop 
armed provocations by Zionists. The situation is especially dif. 
ficult in the south of Lebanon, where “retaliatory” incursions of 
the Israeli army, shellings and air attacks have been an everyday 
occurrence. In March 1978, under the pretext of “combating 
terrorism’, the Israeli army occupied South Lebanon—a move 
tantamount to launching a new war in the region. In April 1980 
Israel staged another large-scale invasion of South Lebanon, and 
toward the end of the year made a step which amounted to a de 
facto change in the delineation of the Lebanese-Israeli border; 
the Israeli military moved the barbed-wire fence marking the 
boundary between Lebanon and Israel 700 metres into Lebanese 
territory. In addition, in several sectors of the border 100-metre- 
wide mine fields were laid. Israel set up a network of military 
outposts and encampments in South Lebanon, where Lebanese 
separatists received military training. In the border zone special 
offices were set up to buy land and other immovables from the 
Lebanese. Israeli currency freely circulates in the area. The moves 
are part of the “creeping annexation” tactic, and are also used 
on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip. 

In June 1982, Israel’s ruling quarters, encouraged and egged 
on by US imperialism, unleashed a new bloody war against the 
Palestinian Arab and Lebanese peoples. Zionists and their im- 
perialist backers had the following main objectives: to liquidate 
the Palestinian national-liberation movement by physically de- 
stroying the PLO’s leadership and military structure in Lebanon; 
to smash the Lebanese national-liberation forces and to turn the 
“cedar country” into a US-Israeli protectorate; and, finally, to 
impose a “peace treaty” on Lebanon and make it an accomplice 
in the Gamp David process. 

“The war’, wrote The Observer on 26 September 1982, “was 
an attempt to solve the Palestine problem by armed force and 


104 


to establish Israel’s pre-eminence in the Levant as far ahead as 
man could see”. Analyzing the situation, Al-Ahali, mouthpiece 
of Egypt’s National Progressive Unionist Party (a left-wing par- 
ty), wrote in its 28 October 1982 issue that Israel seeks a de 
facto partition of Lebanon. The newspaper went on to say that 
after the partition Israel, with US support, would try to “bring 
the neighbouring Arab states, primarily Syria and Jordan, out 
of the state of confrontation with her” and “would press for full 
hegemony in the region”. 

On 17 May 1983 a Lebanese-Israeli peace agreement was 
signed in the Lebanese town of Halde and the Israeli town of 
Qiryat Shemona. The document, praised to the skies by the im- 
perialist and Zionist press and guaranteed by Washington, con- 
tained a number of provisions which amounted to a serious 
encroachment on Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence. 
The Arab quarters regarded the Lebanese-Israeli agreement as 
a direct threat to the security of Syria and other states in the 
region. Thus, under the agreement, Lebanon is not allowed to 
have in its territory anti-aircraft weapons with a range in excess 
of 15,000 feet, which gives Israel complete control of the Leba- 
nese airspace. Lebanese aircraft are prohibited from overflying 
the south of the country without preliminary notification of the 
Israeli authorities. What is more, this agreement imposed on the 
government of Lebanon empowers Israeli troops to stay 
indefinitely in the south of Lebanon in the 50 km-wide so-called 
“security zone’. 

Talking President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon into signing the 
peace agreement with Israel, high-ranking officials of the Reagan 
Administration assured him that within a period of three months 
they would secure the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon. 
This time, too, however, Washington’s words proved to be at 
variance with its deeds: the USA was in no hurry to keep its 
“promise”. Supporting Tel Aviv’s demand that the Israeli with- 
drawal is contingent on the withdrawal of Syrian forces from 
Lebanon, the US ruling quarters were guided not by the Leba- 
non-Israel agreement but by another document which for a long 
time was kept secret from the world public. 

Much later it was disclosed that simultaneously with the Leb- 
anon-Israel peace agreement the USA and Israel signed a secret 
memorandum under which Tel Aviv reserved the right to make 


105 


punitive incursions into Lebanon in the case of “threat” to her 
security or a “terrorist” attack (the name is used by the Zionist 
and imperialist press to describe Palestinian fedayeen and Le. 
banese patriots—L.D.). It was in this memorandum, not in the 
published Lebanon-Israel agreement,. that the withdrawal of 
Israeli troops was made contingent on the evacuation of the 
Syrian contingent of the Inter-Arab Peacekeeping Forces and the 
Palestinian formations remaining in Lebanon. In addition, the 
memorandum contained provision for the further increase of the 
US military aid to Israel. 

Soon after the signing of the Lebanon-Israel agreement Wash- 
ington pressured a session of the European Communities Council 
at the level of heads of state and government of the Common 
Market countries into lifting a temporary embargo on financial 
assistance to Israel and resuming exchanges of government delega- 
tions between EEC members and Israel on a permanent basis. 

With the blessing of the USA and other Western countries 
Israel pursues a “‘position-of-strength policy” towards other Mid- 
dle East countries. For example, in June 1981 the Israeli air 
force staged an unprovoked attack on the Atomic Research Cen- 
ter in Baghdad, which operated strictly in compliance with the 
rules of the International Atomic Energy Agency. This act of 
wanton aggression against Iraq was sanctioned by Washington, to 
say nothing of the fact that Tel Aviv used latest US-made air- 
craft, electronic equipment and bombs in the raid. 


x << %* 


World imperialism’s global plans give Israel the role of a 
“regional metropolis” or a “regional superpower” in the Middle 
East. As part of these plans during the last few years the USA 
and several other Western countries have been seriously con- 
sidering the Israeli idea of “open borders” between Israel and 
a number of Arab states and the prospective creation of a Com- 
mon Market-type organization in the Middle East, in which 
Israel is to play a leading role. 

After the Camp David deal and the signing of the so-called 
peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, the Arab public began 
to fear that Israel would now try to penetrate the economies of 
a number of countries in the Arab East with a view to establish- 


106 


ing its control over certain sectors. Sadat’s capitulationist policies 
gave Tel Aviv hopes that Egyptian trading houses would act as 
go-betweens in the marketing of Israel-made products in Arab 
countries. Israel hoped to gain a foothold in the Egyptian econo- 
my, primarily in its oil production industry, with the financial 
backing of the USA and other Western countries. 

Owing to a number of circumstances, Israeli penetration of 
the Egyptian economy has not acquired large proportions. This 
does not mean, however, that Israel has abandoned her plans to 
escalate its economic offensive on Egypt. There are plans under 
which Israeli exports to Egypt in 1985 are to reach $2 billion, 
while imports from Egypt are not to exceed $80 million.** 

After the 1982 aggression Israel has staged a broad penetra- 
tion of Lebanon’s economy, trampling on the unwritten laws 
of the business world. For example, after seizing the premises of 
Lebanese banks in Saida and Tyre, the Israeli invaders purposely 
made public the secret information pertaining to deposits. In 
June 1982 the major Israeli banks Hapoalim (which, incidental- 
ly, is nominally owned by Histadrut), Leumi and Mizrahi opened 
so-called mobile branches in Lebanon. In its 22 June 1982 
issue the Jerusalem Post noted that the mobile banks, which 
operate in close contact with the military command, plan to 
extent their operations not only to Israeli servicemen but pri- 
marily to the local Lebanese population. The Israeli military 
authorities in Lebanon usually act as agents of Israeli manufac- 
turers and trading companies, taking orders for goods deliveries 
from Israel and creating favourable conditions for their market- 
ing in Lebanon.* 

The Chairman of Lebanon’s Parliament Kamal al-Assad stressed 
in January 1984 that in occupied South Lebanon Israel 
conducts a consistent policy of undermining the area’s agriculture 
and economy as a whole. The Lebanese weekly Al Kifah al 
Arabi commented in October 1982 that Israel’s “economic ag- 
gression” against Lebanon is carried out in accordance with an 
elaborated plan. Under the plan Tel Aviv seeks to destabilize 
and run down Lebanon’s economy, to deprive the country of 


* Israeli commodities are imported to Lebanon duty-free, which ma- 
kes them cheaper than locally made goods. This largely undercuts the 
Lebanese firms’ competitiveness vis-a-vis Israeli ones. 


107 


manpower by compelling hundreds of thousands of industrig| 
and agricultural workers to look for employment abroad, and in 
this way to make Lebanon completely dependent on Israeli im. 
ports. 

Between June 1982 and June 1983 Israel exported $150 mil- 
lion worth of goods to Lebanon. What is even more important 
for Israel’s big business is that since 1982 a certain part of 
Lebanon’s foreign trade has been going via the Israeli port of 
Haifa. Since two thirds of Lebanon’s exports are destined to the 
Arab world (primarily to Saudi Arabia), Israel's ruling quarters 
view Lebanon as an invaluable base for the penetration of the 
Arab markets. Tel Aviv hopes that using all sort of machinations 
(falsified voices and trademarks, front companies, etc.) it will 
go around the Arab boycott of Israeli goods. 

After Camp David, Washington hoped that it would be able 
to set up an aggressive bloc in the Middle East, spearheaded 
against the Arab national-liberation movement, as well as against 
the USSR and other socialist countries. The ruling quarters 
of the USA and international Zionism had plans of setting up 
a Middle East Treaty Organization (METO), which would 
effectively seal Israel’s preeminence in the region.” 

The US Republican administration has tried hard to con- 
vince the conservative Arab regimes that the root cause of the 
long-drawn-out crises in the Middle East is not the unceasing 
Israeli aggression against the Arabs, but “Soviet expansionism”. 
Throwing the “Soviet military threat” scare at the “moderate” 
regimes in the Middle and Near East, during his April 1981 tour 
of the region the then Secretary of State Haig tried to knock 
together an informal “strategic consensus” ranging from Pakis- 
tan in the east to Egypt in the west, and including Saudi Arabia, 
Israel and Turkey.”° 

Along with the Israeli government, the influential Zionist and 
pro-Israeli lobby in the USA have long been doing everything 
to give Israel the status of America’s most trusted ally in the 
Middle East. Since the early 80s the USA has pursued a policy 
of direct military presence in the region and the creation of 
military bases there. After the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai, 
the USA used the flag of the “multinational force” to station 
there a battalion of its 82nd air borne division, which is the 
striking element of the interventionist Rapid Deployment Force. 


108 


The summer 1982 landing of US marines in Lebanon under the 
flag of the “multinational force” broadened the geography of 
direct US military presence in the Middle East. 

The September 1981 talks between President Reagan and the 
then Israeli Prime Minister Begin culminated in the proclama- 
tion of strategic co-operation between the world’s two most ag- 
gressive states—the USA and Israel. On 30 November of the 
same year the defence ministers of the two countries Wein- 
berger and Sharon, the future executioner of Sabra and Sha- 
tila, signed a “memorandum on mutual understanding in the 
sphere of strategic cooperation”. 

Washington’s and Tel Aviv’s congruent strategic policies and 
the former’s stake on the latter as its main outpost in the Middle 
East were once again reaffirmed in the secret directive signed 
by President Reagan on 29 October 1983. The main thrust of 
the document is toward the strengthening and broadening of 
co-operation with Israel, primarily in the military sphere. 

During the November 1983 Washington visit of Israeli Prime 
Minister Shamir and Defense Minister Arens the “strategic 
co-operation” between the two countries was elevated to the 
rank of an almost formal military-political alliance. After the 
talks between Reagan and Shamir it was decided to set up 
a Joint US-Israeli Military Political Committee, whose first sit- 
ting took place in January 1984. The committee’s functions in- 
clude military planning coordination, conduct of joint military 
exercises and the stockpiling of US weapons on Israeli territory. 
Other functions of the committee include the provision of Israel 
ports, notably Haifa, with facilities for servicing the warships of 
the US Sixth Fleet, as well as the equipment of Israeli hospitals 
for receiving US servicemen. During the Washington talks the 
US administration made a decision to increase financial assist- 
ance to Israel] and to grant her unprecedented privileges in this 
field. There were press reports that at the time of the Shamir- 
Arens visit another secret agreement was concluded which pro- 
vided for mounting pressure on Syria to force her withdraw her 
troops from Lebanon. 

During the November 1983 Reagan-Shamir meeting it was also 
decided to establish “free trade” relations between the USA and 
Israel along the lines of the relationship between Israel and the 
EEC planned to take effect in 1987. It is to be recalled that 


109 


under the “free trade” agreement signed between Israel ang 
the European Common Market in 1972, Israel’s exports to EEC 
members are to be duty-free, while tariffs on EEC exports , 
Israel are to be gradually phased out by 1987. The official ne. 
gotiations between Washington and Tel Aviv on the creation 
of a “free trade” zone started in January 1984. 

On 22 December 1983, the last day of the 38th Session of the 
UN General Assembly, the majority of the international com. 
munity adopted a resolution condemning the “strategic co-oper. 
ation” between the USA and Israel. The assembly censureq 
practically the entire Middle East policy of the Reagan adminis. 
tration ranging from interference in the Arab states’ interna) 
affairs to the encouragement of Israel to launch new bloody ad. 
ventures in the region. The international forum once again strong. 
ly condemned Israel’s aggressive expansionist policies and her 
hegemonistic encroachments, which pose a threat to the peoples 
in the Middle East and the world over. 


References 


1. M. Nordau. Max Nordau to his People. A Summons and 
a Challenge, Scopus Publishing Co., N.Y., 1941, p. 92. 


2. “Spiritual Zionism” does not call for the return of the Jews 
to their “ancestral land”. It regards the “Jewish state” not 
as a political, but as a religious, spiritual and cultural cen- 
tre of the “world Jewish nation”. Ahad Ha’Am’s concepts, 
complemented by a slightly modified theory of “national- 
cultural autonomy’’, which is no less nationalistic in charac- 
ter, are broadly used by Zionists to segregate Jews in their 
countries of residence, to place Jewish populations at large 
under religious influences and to draw them into Zionist 
and pro-Zionist organizations. “Spiritual Zionism” is thus 
not in conflict with “political Zionism” but complements it. 


3. See Ahad Ha’Am. Nationalism and Jewish Ethics. N. Y., 
1962. The Zionist Idea, ed. by A. Hertzberg, Harper, N. Y., 
1959, p. 24. 


4, Quoted from: Information Bulletin. Communist Party of 
Israel. Tel Aviv, 1969, No. 3/4, p. 191. 


110 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 
15. 
16. 


17. 


. See, for example, the article by Sh. Perez “Israeli Socialism 


as a Form of Democratic-Socialist Workers’ Movement” 
in Demokratischer Sozialismus in den achtziger Jahren. 
Hrsg. Von R. Lowenthal, Europdische Verlagsanstalt, KéIn- 
Frankfurt am Main, 1979, S. 142-166; as well as the article 
by S. Avineri in Israel Horizons, N.Y., March 1971. 


. See A Galin. Israel—Jewish state, Tel Aviv, Omanut, 


1958, p. 3 (in Russ.). 


. See Th. Herzl. The Jewish State. Scopus Publishing Co., 


N.Y., 1943, p. 30. 


. See Herzl Year Book, Vol. III, N.Y., 1960, pp. 42, 43. 


. See H. Lumer. Zionism. Its Role in World Politics, In- 


ternational Publishers, New York, 1973, pp. 32, 33. 


The Strategic Importance of Syria to the British Empire, 
General Staff, War Office. December 1918, F.O. 371/4178, 
PRO. 


The Balfour Declaration is an official British Government 
statement about the creation of a “Jewish national home- 
land” in Palestine. The declaration was a manoeuvre of 
British imperialism which wanted to divest itself of its 
commitment before the Arabs to make Palestine a part of 
an Arab state. It added to the antagonism between the 
Jewish and Arab residents of Palestine and sealed the 
British imperialist domination of Palestine with the help of 
Zionists. 


United States: Foreign Relations of the US: Near East and 
Africa. Washington, 1964, Vol. IV, pp. 776-777. 


Quoted from: James G. McDonald. My Mission in Israel, 
1948-1951, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1951, p. 189. 


Al Hamishmar, 5 August 1952. 
Haaretz, 7 March 1973. 


N. Weinstock, Le sionisme contre Israél, ed. Francois Mas- 
per, Paris, 1969, p. 514. 


See L’Humanité, 12 April 1967. 


111 


18. 


19. 
20. 


21. 
a2) 


23. 
24. 


25. 


26. 


Michael Bar-Zohar. Ben-Gurion: The Armed Prophet, 
Prentice Hall, New York, 1968, pp. 241-242. 


See Time, October 18, 1971, pp. 38-39. 


State of Israel, Government Yearbook, 5712/1951/1959 
Jerusalem, Government Printer, Introduction, 1951, p. xX. 


See The Jewish Observer, June 13, 1969. 


A. Eban. Voice of Israel, Horizon Press, New York, 1957, 
p. 76. 


Le Monde diplomatique, juillet 1969, p. 1. 


According to IMF data, Israel’s exports to Egypt were: 
in 1980—$2.7 million, in 1981—$11.8 million, and in 1982 
—$21 million (from Israeli sources). Egypt’s exports to 
Israel (its lion’s share is constituted by oil) dropped in 
1982 by 74 million Egyptian Pounds against 1981 to 
310 million. 


See, for example, The New York Times, August 3, 1978; 
Demain L’Afrique (Paris), N 41, 14 January 1980. 


See The New York Times, April 5, 1981. 


Yu. Sedov 


THE TRAGEDY OF LEBANON. 
THE PLANS AND DEEDS OF 
THE ZIONIST AGGRESSORS 


The “Mediterranean Switzerland”, the “showcase of the West”, 
a “corner of paradise”, an “oasis of stability’—those were the 
names given to Lebanon in the 50s-60s amidst the turbulent Mid- 
dle East. At that time, few stopped to think that from the very 
moment the Jewish bourgeoisie initiated its reactionary chauvinist 
ideology, Zionists had levelled their sights on the “Lebanese 
oasis’. Even at their 1st Congress in Basel in 1897, Zionist lead- 
ers announced their claims to Palestine and the neighbouring 
Arab lands, including Lebanon’s southern regions. In 1919, the 
World Zionist Organisation (WZO) submitted to the Paris 
Peace Conference the draft of a Jewish state that included the 
Litani, a river in South Lebanon.’ 

After forming the state of Israel, the country’s leaders lost 
no time in mapping out expansionist plans with regard to Leba- 
non. On May 21, 1948, i.e., a week after the state of Israel was 
established, its first prime minister, Ben Gurion, wrote in his 
diary: “The Achilles heel of the Arab coalition is the Lebanon. 
Muslim supremacy in this country is artificial and can easily be 
overthrown. A Christian State ought to be set up here, with its 
southern frontier on the river Litani. We would sign a treaty of 
alliance with this state.”? In February 1954, Ben Gurion referred 
to the setting up in Lebanon of a puppet right-Christian regime 
as “the central duty, or at least one of the central duties, of our 
foreign policy”, insisting on taking vigorous measures towards its 
practical fulfilment.° 

The future of Lebanon was visualised along the same lines 
by another superhawk, Moshe Dayan, who suggested that the 
Israeli leadership come to terms with some Lebanese officer: 
“the only thing that’s necessary is to find an officer, even just 
a major. We should either win his heart or buy him with mon- 


&—579 113 


ey to make him agree to declare himself the savior of the Maro. 
nite population. Then the Israeli army will enter Lebanon, wil] 
occupy the necessary territory, and will create a Christian regime 
which will ally itself with Israel.’* 

From the very start the two basic directions of Zionist sub. 
versive activity against Lebanon were destabilisation of the in. 
ternal situation in the country by provoking intercommunity 
clashes and armed provocations along the frontiers. 

The aggressive nature of Israel’s policy towards Lebanon was 
especially apparent when masses of Palestinian Arabs started 
pouring into the country in an effort to escape Zionist terror in 
Palestine and seek refuge in neighbouring countries. Following 
the Arab-Israeli War of 1948-1949, the Israeli aggression of 
1967, and the bloody events in Jordan (1970) provoked by im- 
perialist agents, a total of about 260,000 Palestinian Arabs') 
migrated to Lebanon, most of them settling in refugee camps in 
the South and around Beirut with the permission of the Leba- 
nese Government. Their number reached 500,000 by the early 
80s. 

In an attempt to stifle the Palestinian Resistance Movement, 
starting from the latter half of the 60s Israel increasingly resort- 
ed to methods of political and military pressure on Lebanon, 
which had become the operational centre of the PRM. Here are 
a few examples: a pirate attack on the Beirut international air. 
port by the Israeli military, 1968; periodic bombardments of 
Lebanon’s southern regions aimed at turning them into a “dead 
zone”, 1969; a series of incursions of Israeli troops into Leba- 
nese territory and temporary occupation of border areas, 1970- 
1972; acts of terrorism against several prominent Palestinian 
figures residing in Beirut, 1973. 

Trying to split Lebanon into a number of mini-states, the Zion- 
ists did everything possible to destabilise the internal situation 
in that country. Two major religious groups have existed in Leb- 
anon long since: Christian and Muslim. And these two groups 
are divided into several denominations and sects. The confes- 
sional system (distribution of political power among religious 
communities according to established proportions), adopted by 
the National Pact in 1943, under the French Mandate, promot- 
ed the supremacy of the right-wing Maronite forces (Christians 
outnumbered Muslims according to the 1932 census), which led 


114 


to the inferior position of the Muslim population and actually 
fostered intercommunal rivalry. 

That was what Ben Gurion had in mind when calling Leba- 
non “the Achilles heel of the Arab coalition”. Confessional] rivalry, 
further aggravated by deepening social and class contradictions, 
created a favourable environment in the country for imperialist 
and Zionist agents to exacerbate domestic conflicts. Pouring oil 
on the flame, the Israeli and Western propaganda machines were 
busy spreading speculations about the alleged “irreconcilable en- 
mity” between the Christian and Muslim communities. Inter- 
necine dissension became one of Tel Aviv’s most effective instru: 
ments in attaining its expansionist objectives. This was especial- 
ly obvious during the fratricidal civil war of 1975-1976, which 
broke out with the help of the Zionists. 

In a broader sense, the internal tensions in Lebanon have al- 
ways been closely linked to the poor settlement of the Arab-Israe- 
li conflict. ““The civil war in Lebanon has become an inevitable 
consequence of Kissinger’s ‘small step’ policy”, Le Monde diplo- 
matique wrote.® Each time another capitulatory deal was con- 
cluded behind the back of the Arab peoples, there was a sharp 
deterioration of the internal situation in Lebanon, aptly referred 
to as the “barometer” of the Middle East conflict. This was due 
to the growing polarisation of political forces holding differing, 
if not diametrically opposed, positions on the issue of settling 
the Middle East crisis. Inciting internal discord in Lebanon, im- 
perialism and Zionism tried to spark off a new hotbed of ten- 
sion in the Arab world, weaken the united Arab front fighting 
against Israeli aggression, eliminate the PRM, neutralise Syria 
and draw Lebanon into a system of separate settlements planned 
by Washington and Tel Aviv in order to secure their dictate in 
the Middle East region. 

Israel’s armed provocations, which were growing in scope year 
after year, were augmented by the subversive propaganda of the 
Zionist mass media which wished to lay the blame for the aggra- 
vation of the Lebanese crisis at the Palestinians’ door. The Israeli 
newspaper Ma’ariv wrote that the primary objective of the PRM 
was to “do away with the rights of the Christians in Lebanon 
and impose the rule of the Muslim Arabs on them”.’ 

Israel offered the right-wing Christian forces considerable aid 
during the civil war, delivering 110 tanks and armoured carriers, 


8° 115 


5 thousand machine guns, and 12 thousand small arm weapons 
By keeping the fratricidal conflict burning, the Zionists were 
counting on ending the Palestinian presence in Lebanon through 
the Lebanese reactionary forces. 

Analysing Zionist plans for the division of Lebanon, Americap 
analysts P. Jureidini and R.D. McLaurin wrote in their book 
Beyond Camp David: “The prevailing expectation appears to he 
that Lebanon will devolve towards a loose, confederal system 
probably with almost complete autonomy for Christian areas 
(part of Beirut and Mount Lebanon), the Shiite areas of Beka 
and southern Lebanon, the Druze in the Shuf, and Sunni enclave, 
in Beirut, Sidon and Tripoli... If Lebanon within its tradi. 
tional boundaries remains on the map of the Middle East under 
these conditions, it may mean the eviction of all Palestinians 
from the south of the country.’’® 

The course of events in the post-civil war period provides evi- 
dence that imperialist and Zionist circles considered Lebanon as 
a sort of a test laboratory for evolving methods of setting up their 
dictate through dividing the country along religious and com. 
munal lines. The Paris based magazine Afrique-Asie reported in 
October 1982: “To divide Lebanon into five provinces, to dissect 
Egypt and deprive it of its central power, to dissect Syria and 
Iraq into smaller states along religious or ethnic lines, to effect 
the dissolution of the Arabian Peninsula, in a word, to split the 
entire Arab world—such is the plan of the Israeli leaders.” 

The scope of Israeli provocations against Lebanon increased 
dramatically after the Sadat regime ultimately submitted to a 
course of capitulation. Realising that its Egyptian rear was se- 
cure after Sadat’s “pilgrimage” to Jerusalem (November 1977), 
Tel Aviv undertook a new armed adventure against Lebanon as 
early as March 1978 that ended in the intruders’ occupation of 
South Lebanon all the way to the river Litani. 

Faced with strong censure from the international community, 
Tel Aviv withdrew its forces from South Lebanon in June that 
same year; however, the interventionists returned only 5 of the 
14 combat positions to the authority of the UN International 
Forces which had been set up on the decision of the Security 
Council. A vast enclave measuring approximately 15x80 km 
immediately adjacent to the Israeli-Lebanese border was handed 
over by the occupants to the separatists of major Haddad.?® In 


116 


April 1979, Saad Haddad proclaimed “The State of Free Leb- 
anon” in the territory controlled by him. This area became the 
Israeli bridgehead in the south of the country. Thus the anti- 
Lebanese ventures conceived by Moshe Dayan nearly a quarter 
of a century ago had begun to materialise. 

Seeking a pretext to begin a large-scale military incursion deep 
‘nto Lebanon, in April 1981 the Zionists provoked an armed 
conflict between the Syrian contingent of the inter-Arab security 
forces and the Phalangists in Zahle, a city of 200,000 (90 per 
cent Christians) situated in the Bekaa valley, about 40 km east 
of Beirut. The Zionists’ chief aim was to establish control over 
the Bekaa and cut off the major routes between Damascus and 
Beirut, thereby bisecting the country and threatening both Arab 
capitals. As before, Tel Aviv was counting on inciting Christian- 
Muslim rivalry. The Israeli media was spreading inflammatory 
reports in those days that the Christian segment of the popula- 
tion in Zahle was on the verge of being exterminated by the 
“Muslim Barbarians”.?° Analysing the April crisis of 1981, the 
journal Le Monde diplomatique reported: “From now on Israel 
has an excellent moral pretext for interfering in the Lebanese 
conflict: saving Lebanese Christians.’’** 

In July 1981 Israel undertook its greatest armed venture 
against Lebanon since the 1978 aggression. The barbarous attack 
of Israeli aircraft on Beirut’s living quarters and the Palestine 
refugee camps resulted in the killing of hundreds of innocent 
people. A TASS statement announced: “Israel could never be- 
have with such brazen arrogance without sensing support, and 
worse still, encouragement on the part of the United States of 
America. It is from there that the deadly cargo is pouring in, to 
be dropped by Israel on the Lebanese and Palestinian people 
who found temporary refuge in Lebanon.’’”” 

The Arab political community viewed the further aggravation 
of the situation in Lebanon in the spring and summer of 1981 
as directly connected with the Camp David deal and the desire 
of imperialism, Zionism and local reactionary forces to disperse 
the PRM detachments in Lebanon, intimidate the country’s gov- 
ernment, impose a separatist deal with Israel, and make the 
prospect of a comprehensive, just settlement in the Middle East 
even more remote. 

Encouraged by Washington, Israel started preparations for a 


11? 


large-scale act of aggression against Lebanon in the summer of 
1981. On June 6, 1982, Israel launched an offensive to “clean” 
Lebanon of the Palestinian Arabs, destroy the Lebanese national 
patriotic forces, impose a pro-Zionist regime in the country anq 
pressure Syria into recalling its military contingent from Leba. 
non. ‘Those were the basic aims of an operation which was syp. 
posed to be a blitzkrieg, but turned into the most gory and pro. 
longed war in the region. 

Tel Aviv’s attempts to sell this adventure as an “act of retalia. 
tion” for an attempt to kill the Israeli ambassador in London 
(June 3) were futile. According to Jerusalem Post, Sharon aq. 
mitted that he had been “planning this operation since [he] 
took office” (in July 1981). Said Sharon, “After the war 9 
1973, there appeared a new generation of Israeli soldiers pos. 
sessing no combat experience, but needing it.”?* Here, again, js 
what his closest associate, Chief of Staff Rafael Eitan said in an 
interview to the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Aharonoth on June 
14, 1982: “Once I have built a war machine that is worth bil. 
lions of dollars, I must use it.” The operation bearing the code 
name “Peace for Galilee” was thoroughly prepared in advance: 
troop relocation routes were determined, targets for the artillery 
and air force were selected and measures to ensure the surprise 
factor were taken. 

A few months before the invasion, the Zionist special services 
began instigating new intercommunal conflicts in Lebanon with 
greater vigor. Zionist agents endeavoured to create a situation of 
chaos and anarchy in the country by assassinating and kidnap- 
ping people, setting off explosions in the streets, movie theatres 
and by other acts of terrorism. The Zionists were trying to fan 
the flames of civil war again, to split the ranks of the National 
Patriotic Forces, weaken them and clear the way for realising 
their aggressive plans. Simultaneously, Syria became a target of 
subversive activity. To blow up the country’s progressive system 
from the inside, imperialism and Zionism promoted and directed 
the criminal acts of Muslim Brethren—an ultrareactionary or- 
ganisation. By inciting intercommunal tensions wherever Syrian 
forces participated under the banner of the Arab League in 
Lebanon, the Zionists were trying to create an atmosphere of 
hostility around them. According to Tel Aviv’s plans, the elimina- 
tion of the NPF and liquidation and removal of the PRM and 


118 


the Syrian troops were supposed to create favourable conditions 
for transferring power in Lebanon to a pro-Israeli administra- 
tion. 

Tel Aviv brazenly challenged world public opinion by launch- 
ing a large-scale invasion of Lebanon at dawn, on June 6, 1982. 
The armored units of the invaders marched right past the areas 
where the “Blue Helmets’—UN intermediary forces—were sta- 
tioned. Although the expansionist plans of the invaders were 
an open secret, few expected that the Israeli military would dare 
a criminal act such as this, the first such violation ever com- 
mitted against this international organisation in its entire history. 
Several UN soldiers and officers were the first victims of that 
aggression. 

This new act of intervention by Israel was entirely in keeping 
with the interests of the imperial policy pursued by Washington, 
which, having adopted a course of confrontation with the USSR 
and the world socialist community, was trying to aggravate the 
Middle East conflict into global dimensions. “This action of ours 
helped us resolve our own problem, and, moreover, it was of in- 
valuable service to the interests of the United States,” stated 
Simha Erlich, Deputy Premier of Israel.** 

Israel’s aggression against the Lebanese and Palestinian people 
is quite rightfully called Israeli-American. The military and 
economic dependence of Israel on the USA is so great that there 
is every reason to consider Washington a direct accomplice in 
the Lebanese venture of 1982. Time magazine cited some im- 
pressive facts on the role of Washington in beefing up Tel Aviv’s 
“military muscles”: “Since Israel became a country in 1948 the 
US has given $14.9 billion on military aid. About a third has been 
in the form of outright grants, the rest in loans that must be 
repaid within 30 years.”?° 

Equipped almost entirely with American military hardware, 
the Israeli war machine actually assumed the responsibility of 
“doing the dirty work” of promoting the interests of the USA in 
the Middle East, the kind of work the Americans had to do for 
themselves in Indo-China. The Lebanese crisis has provided clear 
evidence of the aggressive nature of the alliance between Wash- 
ington and Tel Aviv. 

International Zionism is a full-time partner together with 
the USA in Israel’s bloody aggression. While the Israeli military 


119 


continued its criminal activity in Lebanon and the world’s pro. 
gressive community was denouncing Begin and his clique, Zion- 
ist organisations in Western countries continued to lend Tel Aviy 
financial and moral support. Zionist-minded American million. 
aires publicly promised Tel Aviv to reimburse its every expenditure 
connected with its aggression in Lebanon. Using their influence 
in Western mass media agencies, the Zionists coerced these or- 
ganisations into “overlooking” the bloody atrocities of the Tel 
Aviv military and even into justifying them. 

Tel Aviv’s desire to solve several economic problems through 
a de facto “recolonisation” of Lebanon was one reason behind 
Israel’s aggression. Imperialist and Zionist plans for Israel call for 
that country to play the role of “regional parent state” in the 
Middle East, with the Arab states serving as raw material sup- 
pliers and sources of cheap labour. 

Beirut has been the business and financial centre in this region 
for many years. Dozens of banks and international insurance 
companies are located here. Israeli strategists made up their 
mind to carry off the palm from Lebanon in this field. When 
the time comes, the Israelis intend to turn their port of Haifa 
into a new regional trade centre, into a Middle East “sea gate”. 
Moreover, Israeli aggression made it possible for Tel Aviv to 
realise its long-cherished strategic objective—to establish com- 
plete control over the Litani waterbed in order to divert the 
river into Israel. 

The plans envisage the building of a canal network along the 
east and south banks of the river, eviction of the local popula- 
tion, and the subsequent transformation of the Litani basin into 
a gigantic fertile area that would supply the whole of Europe 
with fruits and vegetables and would bring millions in profits to 
Israeli monopolies.t® The prelude to this plan is the “scorched 
earth” policy Israel has been pursuing in Lebanon in recent years. 
As a result, a large section of the population has been forced to 
abandon the southern regions of the country. 

Having seized nearly half of the Lebanese territory follow- 
ing the intervention, the Tel Aviv military began preparations 
for a prolonged occupation. An Israeli military administration 
appeared in the South Lebanon. The occupants appointed mili- 
tary governors in the captured cities and circulated Israeli shek- 
els. Signs in Hebrew appeared along the roads in South 


120 


Lebanon. Sources indicate that the ultranationalist organisation 
Gush Emunim intends to build Israeli settlements there. 

The world press again carried the word “genocide” in the days 
of the 1982 Israeli aggression. Barbaric bombardments of popu- 
lated areas, mass killings of civilians, torture and execution by 
fring squads, use of banned types of weapons—all this has revived 
the memory of atrocious Nazi experiments and serve as con- 
vincing proof of the moral degradation of the Israeli army. Ser- 
vice in the Israeli armed forces is a special type of “schooling” 
that instills in the soldiers and officers all the characteristics re- 
quired to make them killers of old people, women and children. 
The combat training system is permeated with the spirit of bla- 
tant racism and religious bigotry. It’s goal is to turn out programm- 
ed “Dayan- and Sharon-types”’. Yet the army does more than 
teach the Zionist doctrine, which is the chief source of racist, 
mostly anti-Arab morality. The army’s practical relations with 
the Arab population, including the function of ensuring govern- 
ment control over the occupied territories, are bound to form 
chauvinistic ideas and perceptions in the minds of Israeli ser- 
vicemen. Ideological brainwashing in the Israeli armed forces 
is characterised, for example, by moral reference points drilled 
into the minds of the personnel, which free them from any 
qualms of consciousness. The soldier, thus, turns into a ravisher, 
maradeur, plunderer. During its intrusion into Lebanon, the 
Israeli army grossly violated practically every commonly accept- 
ed norm of warfare. Suffice it to say that casualties among the 
civilian population accounted for 90 per cent of all those killed 
in the barbaric Tel Aviv military operations. The death toll 
among children was especially high, infanticide, apparently, was 
predetermined. The aggressors littered the streets with bombs 
camouflaged as toys that burst in children’s hands piercing them 
with dozens of metal needles. 

Various types of weapons designed for mass slaughter and 
banned by international conventions, such as ball and cluster 
bombs, napalm, phosphorus shells, toxic chemical agents, and 
others, were widely used in Lebanon by the interventionists. Based 
on information obtained from a surgeon at the Sabra refugee 
camp, the Guardian reported on July 18, 1983: “The rate of 
mortality among victims brought in for operation was very high. 
He said that during the 1978 invasion it had been 15% to 20%, 


121 


but that this time it was between 30% and 50%. He attributeg 
the higher rate to kind of weapons being used by the Israelis» 

Clinics and hospitals, infirmaries and ambulances were aj) 
targets in Israeli air attacks. Trying to paralyse the whole systen, 
of health care and medical aid, the interventionists blocked of 
deliveries of blood plasma and medicines into besieged Beiryt 
and, after seizing the city, they began to remove medical equip. 
ment from hospitals. 

Having destroyed practically all Palestinian refugee camps 
on occupied Lebanese territory, the Zionists confined the Pales. 
tinian male population in concentration camps where the men 
were subjected to humiliation and torture. The fate of the fight. 
ers of the Palestinian Resistance Movement, who were denied 
the status of prisoners of war by the Tel Aviv administration, 
was especially hard. 

The Israeli Ha’aretz newspaper published a story about one 
of the paper’s employees who was a guard in the Ansar concen. 
tration camp. “The situation here was unbearable for both the 
detainees and ourselves,” the employee wrote, noting that many 
prisoners disappeared without a trace. “Nervous breakdowns 
were not an infrequent occurrence among our soldiers. That was 
the result of what they had to see. One of the soldiers committed 
suicide on the day his service tenure expired.’’*” 

The horrifying massacre in the Palestinian camps of Sabra 
and Chatila, where several thousand civilians were slaughtered, 
was the terrible culmination of the Zionist-genocide. The Pales- 
tinian camps of Sabra and Chatila have lined up in one tragic 
row with Khatyn (Byelorussia), Oradour-sur-Glane (France), 
Lidice (Czechoslovakia), Babi Yar (the Ukraine), and Sonmy 
(Vietnam). 

The Israeli aggressors were bent on destroying monuments and 
institutions of culture and science. Thus, the building of Arab 
University and the Exhibition Hall of the works of art and culture 
of Palestinian artists were reduced to rubble by Israeli shelling 
and bombing. The archives of the Palestinian Research Centre 
were barbarously plundered. Many monuments of the Phoeni- 
cian, Roman and Byzantine epochs, and the treasures of the 
Omayyad architecture were threatened with complete destruc- 
tion. According to experts, the damage inflicted by the Zionist 
Vandals is beyond repair. 


122 


Breaking into West Beirut, the occupants went on a spree 
of looting. They stopped at nothing: furniture, radio equipment, 
books, clothes, telephones, etc.—everything was loaded onto 
trucks and driven to Israel by armoured carriers. The interven- 
tionists vandalised many private homes and offices, including the 
Beirut airport building and Barbir Hospital; they seized a num- 
ber of foreign embassies and defiled mosques. 

The aggressors rampaged in the occupied areas of Southern 
Lebanon with even greater impudence. They evicted Lebanese 
government employees from their offices and turned the premises 
into commandant offices; they blew up the homes of those 
people whom they suspected of collaboration with “guerrillas”. 
The local population was required to carry special passcards 
when using roads which were declared “military routes’. Or- 
chards were cut down and fields burned wherever Israeli troops 
were stationed. 

Having destroyed the military and political structure of the 
PLO in the South of the country, the interventionists launched 
a campaign of mass reprisals against those Lebanese suspected of 
sympathising with the PRM and NPF. As a result, tens of thou- 
sands of Shiites were forced to abandon their homes and become 
refugees, just as in 1978. The press also reported on the aggres- 
sors’ plans to “clear” Southern Lebanon of the Palestinian pop- 
ulation completely by, first, confining the people to reservations 
especially created for that purpose, and then sending them to 
the North or beyond the Lebanese borders. Palestinian families 
residing in towns and villages between Tyre and Saida received 
letters and leaflets containing threats of physical extermination 
unless they followed “advice” and moved to the Palestinian ghet- 
to in Ain el-Hilveh. 

The Israelis and separatists also busied themselves with set- 
ting up local administrations and militia organisations composed 
of collaborationists. 

Haddad’s gangs, which were plaguing the South, were widely 
used by the Israelis to pressure the Lebanese Government: when 
Lebanese-Israeli talks were deadlocked in mid-February 1983, 
the separatists expanded the zone under their control by seizing 
a total of one-fourth of the country. 

Contrary to the deceitful declarations of the Zionist propagan- 
da machine which claimed that the occupation of Lebanon was 


123 


necessary to ensure political stability in the country, Israeli ag. 
gression offered convincing evidence that the notorious colonia] 
method of “divide and rule” could be used in the 20th century. 

In mid-May 1983, the so-called “peace agreement” with Te] 
Aviv was imposed on Lebanon as a result of crude political pres. 
sure by the USA and Israel’s military pressure. The agreement’s 
main purpose was to perpetuate the presence of Israeli aggres- 
sors on Lebanese territory and to tighten even closer the Camp 
David lasso around the neck of the Arab people. It was designed 
to coerce Lebanon into linking up with imperialism and Zion- 
ism, remove it off the ranks of Arab and nonaligned states, and 
subordinate the country to Washington’s global policy directed 
against the USSR, the whole socialist community, and the na. 
tional liberation movement. 

During the summer of 1983 Israel redeployed its forces to the 
South, behind the Avali river. This withdrawal to new frontiers 
was not at all a “peace initiative” as Israeli propaganda tried to 
proclaim. It was a matter of taking up more advantageous posi- 
tions rather than withdrawing the aggressor’s forces from Leba- 
non. Redeployment was carried out with an aim to divide the 
country and annex its southern areas. Thus, the Israeli forces 
would be concentrated in one striking force aimed against Syria. 
Again, the invaders withdrew from the mountainous areas only, 
where they had suffered greater losses. Strong fortifications were 
erected by the Tel Aviv military along the new front. 

The “peace agreement” forced upon the Lebanese and the 
interventionists’ reprisals, however, failed to repress the fighting 
spirit of the Lebanese people. The scope of resistance to the 
aggressors was growing. The unity of patriotic forces found or- 
ganisational form in July 1983 when the National Salvation 
Front was created (NSF) and demanded that the humiliating 
agreement with Israel be abrogated. The Front was strongly 
supported by the Shiite movement Amal. In the end, Washington 
and Tel Aviv failed to win concessions from Syria. In fact, “peace- 
making” efforts that were carried out amidst Israel’s military 
pressure on Lebanon led the USA into a blind alley. 

The United States then resorted to direct armed interference 
in the internal affairs of the Lebanese Republic. First the Ameri- 
can marines, and then the navy artillery and the 6th Fleet air 
force opened fire on Lebanese, Palestinian, and Syrian positions. 


124 


By directly joining the fighting against the NPF on the side of 
the Lebanese army operating under the control of the Phalan- 
gists, Washington made itself a participant of the internecine war 
jn Lebanon. 

The world press was justified in linking the escalation of US 
armed interference in Lebanon with the anti-Arab “strategic 
accord” formalised in late November 1983 at the Washington 
talks between Prime Minister Shamir and President Reagan. 
The aggressive American-Israeli alliance was hoisted to a quali- 
tatively new level at this meeting. The partners set up a bilateral 
military-political committee, which discussed at its first meeting, 
in January 1984, the questions of conducting joint exercises, the 
deployment of American combat weapons in Israel, increased 
military aid to that country, exchange of intelligence informa- 
tion, the use of Israeli ports by the 6th Fleet, etc. 

However, the situation in Lebanon failed to evolve in accord- 
ance with the American-Israeli scenario. In February 1984 
opposition forces thwarted the Phalangists’ efforts to seize Greater 
Beirut with the support of the army and to cut off the city’s 
southern Muslim suburbs from the mountain area controlled by 
the NPF. The government of Wazzan was forced to resign. There 
was a split in the army: many Muslim servicemen quit and joined 
the patriotic forces. The February 1984 events, which led to 
the patriots establishing control over 60 per cent of the country’s 
territory, showed the true balance of power in Lebanon. 

Under these circumstances, the American marines, along with 
the contingents of other NATO countries comprising the “mul- 
tinational forces”, had to leave Lebanese territory, which went a 
long way in proving the failure of US policy in that country. 
However, the redeployment of American GIs onto the ships of 
the 6th Fleet was, in fact, a stratagem in the neocolonial style: 
“Stay while leaving”. “Nothing has changed,” Caspar Wein- 
berger said frankly. “We are not quitting from Lebanon. The 
marines are being deployed 2-3 miles to the west.”** 

At the request of the opposition, which had several times 
seriously defeated the Lebanese enemy in combat, President 
Amin Gemayel abrogated the shackling Lebanese-Israeli “peace 
agreement” on March 5. The US-Israeli plans of involving Le- 
banon in the anti-Arab Camp David process burst at the seams. 
But the Tel Aviv Government flatly refused to recall occupation 


125 


forces from Lebanon and cast a torrent of threats at the Lebanese 
Government. Israeli Prime Minister Shamir brazenly declared 
that by abrogating the “peace agreement’ Lebanon had signed 
its own death warrant. 

Time will show what course events will take in the future. 
One thing is clear, the curtain has not yet fallen on the Leb. 
anese tragedy. Israeli soldiers still occupy one-third of the Leb. 
anon, and the guns of the 6th Fleet naval artillery are still 
aimed at the country. Neither Washington nor Tel Aviv is in- 
terested in stabilising the situation in the Lebanese Republic; 
they are trying to frustrate any efforts to settle the crisis on a 
just basis. 

But another thing is also clear. The Lebanese people, encour- 
aged by their success in the struggle for their national interests, 
are capable of winning a victory, whatever the power of its en- 
emies’ fleets. 


References 


1. See La Rude Epreuve du Libun-Sud, Beirut, 1981. 
2. The Middle East International, June 18, 1982. 


3. S. V. Mallison and W. Th. Mallison, Armed Conflict in 
Lebanon, 1982: Humanitarian Law in a Real World Sett- 
ing, American Educational Trust, Washington, D.C. 
1983, p. 5. 


4. L. Rokach, Israel’s Sacred Terrorism: a Study Based on 
Moshe Sharett’s Personal Diary and Other Documents, 
1980, p. 25. 


5. See E. Dmitriev, The Palestinian Knot, Moscow, 1978, 
p. 140 (in Russian). 


6. Le Monde diplomatique, November 1978, p. 2. 
7. Ma’ariv, Tel Aviv, October 22, 1969. 


8. Paul Jureidini, R.D. McLaurin, Beyond Camp David. 
Emerging Alignment and Leaders in the Middle East, N.Y., 
1981, p. 64. 


9. Defense nationale, P., October 1980, p. 115. 


126 


_ Le Monde diplomatique, mai 1981, p. 5. 

. Ibid. 

_ Pravda, July 22, 1981. 

~The Palestinian-Israeli War in Lebanon. The Battle of 


Beirut. Why Did Israel Invade Lebanon?, Amman, 1983, 
p. 18 (in Arabic). 


_ Al-Ard, Damascus, February 1983. 

. Time, August 16, 1982, p. 8. 

_ Al-Habadis, Beirut, January 7. 

, Afrique-Asie, January 3-16, p. 15. 

. US News and World Report, February 20, 1984, p. 29. 


I. Belyayev 
TO TEL AVIV AND BACK 


This article by I. Belyayev, a well-known Soviet pub}. 
cist and scholar, is not based on scientific research. [t, 
merit lies in Belyayev’s live impressions of his visit to Is. 
rael where he had a chance to meet and talk with public 
figures, scholars, journalists, people of different ages and 
political convictions. 


The entry was surprisingly quiet. Without saying a word, the 
young airport police-woman looked first at the photo in the pass- 
port, then at me, checked my name in the lists of “non grata” 
persons, and seeing it was not there, she inquired courteously: 

‘What kind of stamp do you prefer? ‘Slip-in’, maybe?”’* 

“It does make a difference?” 

“Many ask for it”. 

I volunteered for an entrance stamp in the passport. With a 
smile, the girl allowed me into Israel. No other questions asked. 

When our luggage was duly on the carts, we were invited to 
a press conference instead of the customs inspection. Clear 
enough. Soviet delegations in Israel are infrequent guests. Quite 
infrequent! That is why the interest for them is so great. Rather, 
enormous. Especially now. 

“All of Israels’ press is waiting for you.” 

Yaron Beker said so, who was meeting us together with our 
other friends from the Israel-USSR Association. He pointed out 
that there were people from influential Israeli dailies, to say 
nothing of the TV and radio, among the attending journalists. 
Not from Kol-Israel (Voice of Israel) station alone, but also 
from the one in service of the Israeli armed forces. 

Was not it a bit too much for a first introduction? Well, per- 
haps meeting Israel in this way is not bad at all for a start. Con- 


* When the entrance visa (in this case into Israel), normally stamped 
in the passport, is at variance with the interests of the entrant, it 
can be stamped on a separate slip of paper to be collected at the exit 
from the country. 


128 


sidering Friday. On the eve of a Saturday most Israelis settle in 
front of their ‘I’V sets waiting for breath-taking news. 

“Tonight you are going to make ‘news number one’.”’ 

It was our friend Yaron who said so. A minute later we real- 
d that he might have a point there. 

Every seat was taken in the small hall where the press confer- 
ence was to take place. Except for the divan intended for us. 
Flood lighting. I am peering into the faces of the crowd. What 
is behind them? It looks like interest is prevailing, although I 
had a momentary premonition that the meeting would not be an 


ise 


easy one... 
Now comes the first question: 


“Have you brought any news of reviving diplomatic relations 
between the Soviet Union and Israel?” 

“No, we have not brought any such news...” 

We recalled that the Soviet Union had always presumed that 
Israel must exist. It was common knowledge. However, we fa- 
voured a peaceful Israel, and we were against its aggression and 
expansion at the expense of its neighbours. 

Arousal. I inquired from an aged Israeli journalist sitting next 
to me who in Israel was interested today in restoring diplomatic 
relations with the Soviet Union. I got a laconic answer: 

“Everybody.” 

When I stressed that the issue of renewed relations between 
our countries was insoluble when abstracted from time and 
space, that a positive settlement of this question was hindered, 
above all, by Israel’s aggressive policy in the Middle East, I 
was immediately aware of disappointment among the audience. 
Some spread their arms grievously, others grinned. 

Instantly came the next question: 

“Do you consider Israel a fascist state?”’ 

“We do not consider Israel a fascist state, it being quite ob- 
vious, however, that the occupationist policy of your govern- 
ment, especially its methods of warfare in Lebanon, are clearly 
of Nazi character.” 

As the clinching words of the answer rang out, an invisible 
wall rose between the Israeli journalists and ourselves. We rapped 
on it, and we cited tangible evidence, irrefutable arguments. All 
for nothing! We were not argued with. We were listened to, 
without hearing. The wall was impenetrable... 


9-579 129 


Could memory really fail the Israelis? Unthinkable! Were 
not most of those present on the other side of their fifties? 
So they could not help remembering everything connected 
with World War II. Of course they remember. But in their 
own fashion. That is “the rub”. It is precisely their memories 
fashioned in their own way that made them reason in their own 
way. 

What does it mean, ‘remembered in their own way’? Could 
Nazism have several different interpretations? In Israel, as a mat. 
ter of fact, it is possible. Most Israelis believe that Nazism means 
only gas chambers. Those horrible ones that smoked in Maida. 
nek, Treblinka and other Nazi death camps. Fighters against Na. 
zism were victimised there, European Jews among them. 

“The war in Lebanon has nothing in common with Nazism,” 
our opponents said. “Israel and Nazism are antipodes.” 

True enough, there are no gas chambers in Lebanon, but the 
savage war against defenseless civilian population in defiance of 
the Geneva conventions and other norms of international law, in 
all actuality, is going on up to this very day. But there exists the 
“Ansar” concentration camp where people are being tortured, 
where prisoners die ‘“‘attempting to escape”! ‘The massacre in Sab- 
ra and Chatila, bombing raids on 17 Palestinian refugee camps 
lasting for hours, with thousands of children, women, old people 
killed. .. Who will have the nerve to deny all that? 

‘Are not Israelites themselves talking of the Judaism-Nazism 
explosion today as Professor Leibovitz of Jerusalem University 
has done, for example?” 

“The policy of the current Israeli Government is a Judaist- 
Nazi policy. We have done what Hitler did after six years in 
power.” 

That is how Professor Jeshaayahi Leibovitz appraised Begin’s 
policy, all that has been perpetrated in Lebanon after the inva- 
sion of the Israeli army there. The prominent Israeli chemist 
made this statement when speaking at a press conference in 
London in the summer of 1982. Is not what we have said backed 
up by his uncompromising logic? Is there anyone among those 
present here who would dare to disprove professor Leibovitz? 

The reaction to my counterquestion was somewhat delayed. 
A tall Israeli of some age was sitting in the corner to my right. 
He was not missing a word of what was said during the press con- 


130 


ference. It seemed to me that I had met him somewhere and 
even talked to him. Where, when? Could it be in January 1974, 
at the 101st kilometre of the Cairo-Suez highway? It was for 
the first time then that I happened to meet Israeli journalists 
face-to-face, as the phrase goes. In memory of that encounter 
J am keeping a notable entry in my diary: “Just human beings!”. 
Today their colleagues caused a substantial revision of that 
judgement. Israeli journalists’ position is somewhat dubious: they 
‘ntimated to us that, while Professor Leibovitz was free to specu- 
late on the Judaism-Nazism explosion, we had better not... Not 
that we were prohibited to do it, but that traits of fascism in 
Israel had better be left alone! 

Such was the second stereotype in the Israelis’ perceptions and 
judgements (the first one concerned the interpretation of fas- 
cism) that we were faced with in Te] Aviv within the first hours 
of our visit in Israel. Little by little it dawned on me: stereotypes 
in Israel were being created by the Israelis not for ‘internal con- 
sumption’ only. No, they more than just believe in them, but are 
trying to impose them on others by all means, sometimes astonish- 
ing... 

What name should be given to this phenomenon? How about 
an “Israeli approach to Israel”? To me it looked very clearly 
programmed; interpretations of the true content of events oc- 
curring inside and outside the Israeli state, all appraisals with 
regard to Israel must always remain the unshakable monopoly 
of the Israelis themselves. Amazingly, the phenomenon observed 
is a fact! The reason behind Israel’s cleavage with the rest of 
the world may lie in this very peculiar approach. And indeed, 
the 6th war of Israel against the Arabs—this time in Lebanon 
against the Lebanese and the Palestinian Arabs—for the first 
time in all the three and a half decades of the existence of the 
Israeli state, has sparked off protest, as acute as never before, 
even in the United States, let alone Western Europe, that has 
always been Israel’s mechanical supporters in the past. 

Begin and his supporters immediately retorted by accusing of 

, anti-Semitism all those who denounced “his war” in Leba- 
non! It failed. The denunciation of Israel continues. The parallel 
between the activities of Begin and those of the Hitlerites 1s 
being drawn ever more often. But the Israeli Prime Minister is 
still counting on general permissiveness and impunity. Why so? 


gt 131 


For the reason that the European Jews suffered great losses dur. 
ing World War II. 

“Yet, why must somebody else bear the responsibility for the 
crimes committed by the Hitlerites?” we asked in turn. 

A pause. Again we were told that we were not justified in 
qualifying Israel as a fascist state. Again a pause. Now it was 
our turn to wonder. None of us ever insisted on anything like 
that. The pause obviously became too long! 

I understood at last! The Israeli journalists gathered at the 
Tel Aviv airport wanted to justify themselves! To set themselves 
right with themselves, with us, with the whole world. Yes, really 
so, with us, too. Of course, they failed to choose the right form 
of self-justification. They were not ready to admit they censured 
the “longest war” of Israel in Lebanon and its obvious sliding to 
Nazism, to call a spade a spade. 

The journalists besetting us at the Tel Aviv airport with what 
they believed to be piercing questions envied Professor Leibovitz. 
He dissociated himself! Though not all Israelis—far from all!— 
have reconciled themselves to their imminent responsibility for 
what has been done in Lebanon. .. 

Suddenly, as if acknowledging that we were right, everybody 
started talking of a possible war with Syria. Some of these days, 
if not tomorrow. Something to the contrary, too, was said, 
though. My aged neighbour recalled the statement of Zeev Schiff, 
the military observer of the Ha’aretz daily, who stressed in one 
of his articles that Syria’s cooperation with the Soviet Union nul- 
lified the danger of Israeli-Syrian confrontation. 

Exactly at this moment the Israeli who was sitting in the far 
corner and listening to every word I said rose from his seat, 
came up to the table burdened with a host of microphones and 
straightened one of them carefully. It carried the engraved 
words “Voice of Israel”, which added absolutely nothing to my 
recollections. Yet... 

Questions were being shot at us now at a machine-gun rate. 
Afghanistan was thrown into action. Pro-Americanism was being 
voiced in the reasoning of the Israeli journalists besetting us with 
ever increasing sharpness. Even West European writers meet- 
ing in West Berlin and deploring the sliding down to a nuclear 
catastrophe were not left alone... 

The press conference was nearing its close when I was ap- 


132 


proached by a tall man. The one that was sitting in the corner to 
the right. 

“Usef Dan,” he introduced himself in Russian. “I am from 
Voice of Israel.” 

No, I had never seen him before although he looked like an 
old acquaintance to me. Yet, I did remember. His name! It is 
quite familiar, that name. When working in Beirut, I heard many 
programmes produced by Usef Dan. They were always anti- 
Soviet. His commentaries suffered from a similar kind of bias, 
to put it mildly. 

“Would you give an interview to the Israeli TV?” asked Usef 
Dan. 

I consented. 

His questions were mostly concerned with the situation in the 
Middle East. But the opening question was different. 

“What are your Intentions in coming to Israel?” 

“To see and understand the country whose policy I have been 
studying for many years without live contact, so to say. Now, 
I would like to clear up many things, if I am not interfered with, 
right here on the spot.” 

There was no telling if my Israeli opponents (and they were 
many) were satisfied with my answer. They might have expected 
something different from me... 

At the hotel, Yaron told us he would constantly stay with us 
while we were in Tel Aviv. 

“Regard me as your guardian angel. Anything can happen 
here, you know. So, please, stay in sight. . . 

We did not have to bother Yaron. However, he had to an- 
swer Many questions. 

‘A tour of the city would be handy,” Yaron offered. “T’ll make 
sure you'll visit places of breath-taking interest. We'll start with 
the Square of Israeli Tsars”’. 

Tsars in Israel? Yes, they were there. Solomon, David and oth- 
ers. A long, long time ago, in ancient Israel. Hearing the name 
of one of Tel Aviv’s largest squares, I realised even deeper why 
the current rulers of ‘Israel invoke history cult in permanently 
reminding the Israelis and the rest of the world of the far-gone 
past. The Old Testament is proclaimed the source of law. What 
law? The right to the war in Lebanon! The Israeli must believe 
that there he is “freeing” his land. 


133 


The bus stopped next to the square. It was decorated with 
a surrealistic sculpture. It was surrounded with a vast space. 
That was the space that witnessed the turmoil of the Tel Aviy 
demonstration of September 25, 1982. An anti-war manifesta. 
tion of extraordinary scope and fortitude! Nothing of that kind 
had ever occurred in the country’s entire history. 400 thousand 
Israelis, people of vastly differing beliefs, but unanimous in their 
striving to stop the war not only in Lebanon, but everywhere 
beyond Israel, convinced even Begin that they could not be ig. 
nored any longer. It was following that demonstration that 
Israel’s Prime Minister agreed to set up an ad hoc commission 
to investigate the massacre in Sabra and Chatila. 

I took a long time standing there on that grand square so 
full of the memory of the two opposed forces: the war in Leb- 
anon and the fervent sruggle against it, trying to understand 
what it was that motivated those Israelis who gathered on it 
in September. After all, the gigantic magnitude of the demonstra- 
tion is not the only thing that matters. Certainly, it was not an 
easy thing to assemble so many people there. But something else 
was still more imporant. It convinced many that a menacing 
shift had occurred: there was no longer any national consensus 
existing in Israel concerning the question of war against the 
Arabs. I was told about this by the Israelis themselves, those 
with whom I managed to discuss what was going on in the coun- 
try. That view was shared, not only by the adherents of anti- 
war movements, but also by some members of Knesset, journal- 
ists whose press reports are heeded. Could it be that the process 
of opinion ramification on the war in Lebanon, and moreover, 
on war and peace in general, is just beginning? Future will show 
what it is going to come to. However, the cleavage in the Israeli 
society is apparent. And it is deepening, considering everything 
that we witnessed in Israel. First ominous question marks ap- 
peared in the strategic schemes and calculations of those who 
determine that country’s policy today. 

What is actually meant? Let us recall that before the 6th war 
of Israel its governments, no matter who they were headed by, 
enjoyed full support of most Israelis. Gommunists and their sup- 
porters were the only ones who voted against in Knesset. And 
they found themselves in isolation. 

“Of course we Communists and our supporters took part in the 


134 


September 1982 demonstration,” Yaron said. “But even we did 
not expect such landslide magnitude. It is all over now in Israel 
with the isolation of Communists. . . ” 

There were young people, intellectuals, employees, and even 
servicemen among those participating in the September demon- 
stration that aroused the country so much. I brought from Israel 
an interesting souvenir—a clipping with the text of the manifes- 
to of a large group of officers and men declaring publicly that 
from then on they were going to fight within the Israeli borders 
exclusively. They published this declaration at their own expense 
paying a sizable amount of money to the publishers of a well- 
known newspaper. Yaron sort of summarised, when presenting 
us with the clipping: 

“You see, the fact of a declaration like this being published 
by our bourgeois press means a lot. Even the Israeli army is 
no longer unanimous regarding the war. Not in Lebanon 
alone. ..”” 

It was quiet on the Square of Israeli Tsars in Tel Aviv on that 
cool evening. Not a soul around. But it seemed to me that I was 
hearing the turbulent passions that burst out in September 1982. 
I do not know what Begin thought then. Anyway, it is not hard 
to imagine. The Israeli Prime Minister understood that there had 
appeared a new factor in the political life of Israel, unknown 
hithertofore—the anti-war factor. It has a tendency, which is 
also scary to the Israeli establishment, it is gaining momentum. 

Our minibus was rolling slowly along the deserted streets of 
Tel Aviv. Everything around us reminded that the Saturday 
eve had already moved into the city properly, Saturday being 
revered in Israel as a religious day, associated with many taboos. 
Using any means of transportation is one of them. 

In my thoughts I was still lingering on the Square of Israeli 
Tsars. Episodes from the anti-war actions of those who refused 
to turn suicidal raced through my mind. A question arose: 

“Those demonstrating against war today, what are they going 
to undertake tomorrow?” 

It was not an idle question. There are some who believe that 
anti-war movement in Israel is nothing more than a protest. Just 
that! The people gathered, rioted and ... returned to their 
homes. They have no desire to form any anti-war party, nor do 
they have any desire to go into politics. Why? 


135 


“In Israel,” Yaron explained, “intelligentsia, especially the one 
that is actively engaged in anti-war struggle, considers politics 
a dirty trade. Many Israelis, especially the so-called “middle 
class’, are reluctant to have a hand in it.” 

Hard as it was, but we parked at a small building. By the 
way, Tel Aviv is not a multistory city except for the luxurious 
hotels on the strand. We entered the doorway and were frankly 
astonished. We walked right into an advertisement about a com- 
ing show of Soviet films. Familiar titles flickered. We walked 
into a spacious library. Another surprise—racks full of Soviet 
books and magazines. When upstairs, we felt at home, like we 
had never left Moscow. 

That was the House of Israel-Soviet Friendship in Tel Aviv. 
It has not just existed a long time, it has been working actively. 
This conviction came in the main foyer, where we met with 
most interesting personalities—delegates from anti-war move- 
ments in Israel. The gray-haired Uri Avneri, with the looks of 
a professor, from the Peace-Now movement, stood out among 
them. As far back as 1977, Uri Avneri proposed several draft 
resolutions in Knesset to Begin on accommodating the interests 
of the Palestinian Arabs. They were rejected. In the Israeli es- 
tablishment they flatly refuse even to talk about a possibility of 
creating an Arab Palestinian state. 

Among the questions addressed to us there was one concern- 
ing the situation in the Arab unity in the fight against the Israe- 
li occupation. The man asking the question stressed that Israel 
would never leave Lebanon if the Arabs layed down arms—never! 
At least Southern Lebanon. In spite of the Israeli-Lebanese 
agreement. 

We inquired about the future of the anti-war movements. The 
answer we got was inspiring. From the viewpoint of those engaged 
in the Israeli-Soviet dialogue, the anti-war struggle has a per- 
spective, for endless funerals—of those killed in Lebanon—are 
not desired in Israel. Yet, they continue to the present day. 

One more discovery—the last one on our first day in Tel Aviv. 
In the Friendship Club we were asked many questions regarding 
the position of the Soviet Union on the Middle East. 

Sensing our astonishment—we were surprised at the ignorance 
of our conversation partners—a young lady participating in the 
dialogue took no time coming up with an explanation, 


136 


“In Tel Aviv one has to fight his way to the truth about the 
Soviet Union, about its policy,” the student of Jerusalem Uni- 
versity said. “The Israelis are constantly being misinformed about 
your country. Anti-Sovietism here is boundless.” 

I must admit, I felt awkward hearing this. Another question 
arose—the last on that evening: 

“FTow can a country be hated that is doing so much for peace 
in the Middle East?” 

Catching the gist of the question, the lady-student added: 

“The ruling Israeli establishment cannot do any other. Its 
policy is blind anti-Sovietism. . .” 


A. Semioshkin 


ZIONIST POLICIES WITH 
REGARD TO JERUSALEM 


Recently, the world press has not given a front page coverage 
to the Jerusalem problem. General attention is currently fixed on 
other acute Middle East conflicts such as the US-Israeli inva. 
sion of Lebanon and the protracted Iran-Iraq war. It would be 
misleading to interpret this as an acceptance by the world pub- 
lic of Israel’s seizure of the whole of Jerusalem in 1967. The 
question of the future of Jerusalem is still an acute one and the 
Jerusalem issue remains one of the most complicated and delicate 
aspects of the painful Palestinian problem. If unsolved, this issue 
will render it impossible to achieve a just and lasting peace in the 
Middle East. In view of the city’s unique religious and historical 
monuments, which are revered by Christians, Muslims and Jews, 
there is considerable international interest in Jerusalem. The 
Jerusalem question can only be solved through international ne- 
gotiations with all the parties concerned participating. 


THE ROLE OF JERUSALEM 
IN ZIONIST PLANS 


Zionist plans to turn the whole of Palestine into a racist type 
Jewish state have also shaped the Israeli Government’s policy 
with regard to Jerusalem. Jerusalem, for centuries the centre 
of these lands, is considered by the Israelis to symbolise their 
“historic right” to govern the entire Palestine. To fit their ex- 
pansionist ideology, Zionists claim religious and mystical devo- 
tion to Zion (Jerusalem). It should be noted, however, that for 
two millenniums following the destruction of Jerusalem by the 


138 


Roman legions there was no mass migration of pious Jews to 
the “Holy City”. The Judaist loyalty to Jerusalem, therefore, did 
not become a disturbing political factor for the indigenous pop- 
ulation, the Arabs. 

A well-known Arab researcher, Henry Cattan, offers this 
evaluation of Zionist attempts to apply “historical argumenta- 
tion” to justify their claims to Jerusalem in his book Jerusalem: 
“As a result of Zionist presentations, the impression is at times 
given—and taken—that history of any consequence stopped in 
Palestine in the year 70 A.D. and only began again with the 
Zionist movement under Herzl.”* 

The Zionists stepped up their already widespread practice of 
evicting the Palestinian Arab population from Jerusalem on the 
eve of and during the Palestine War of 1948-1949. The war 
resulted in the Zionists’ occupation of 12 of the 15 Arab resi- 
dential quarters in Jerusalem located outside the walls of the 
Old City.? It was no coincidence that the mass slaughter of Arabs 
on April 9, 1948, by terrorists from the Zionist organization Ir- 
gun Zwai Leumi occurred in the village of Deir Yassin, which 
lies three kilometres to the west of Jerusalem. The objective 
here was to sow panic among the Arab population and to force 
them to flee not only Jerusalem but the whole of Palestine. The 
terrorists paraded the few surviving villagers in trucks through 
the streets of Jerusalem “to enhance the effect”, while Irgun 
leaders held a special press conference on the same day.’ Israel’s 
first President, Chaim Weizman “... did not disguise his feel- 
ing of relief describing the flight of the Palestinians as a ‘mirac- 
ulous simplification of the problem’.”* Cattan surmises that the 
number of Arab refugees from Jerusalem and its environs in 1948 
could be estimated between 50,000 to 60,000.° 

Even during the Palestine War of 1948-1949 the Israeli leader- 
ship considered the occupation of the whole of Jerusalem a 
top priority political task, despite the fact that the Zionists had 
voted support for the decision of the UN General Assembly to 
internationalise the city only a few months before. By the time 
the English withdrew from Jerusalem (May 14, 1948), Zion- 
ist armed detachments had seized virtually the entire city, in- 
cluding the central district of East Jerusalem, Sheikh Jarrah. 
They met with resistance only in a few Arab quarters, for exam- 
ple, in Musrara. 


139 


It was only because the Arab states joined the war on May 15 
1948, that the Arab Legion was able to hold back Zionist units 
on May 19, and Jerusalem was divided into the West (Israeli) 
and East (Arab) parts. In June 1967 Israeli troops seized Fag, 
Jerusalem, thus placing the entire city under Israeli occupation. 


ISRAELI EFFORTS TO 
LEGALISE THE ANNEXATION 


On the day after the end of the so-called Six Day War, June 11, 
1967, the Israeli Government, which included all the Zionist 
parties, began to press for the immediate annexation of East 
Jerusalem. The bill on the annexation, expansion of the city 
limits, its municipal status and the status of religious sites in the 
city was submitted to the Government on June 21 and approved 
at its earliest session on June 25. Two days later it was passed 
by the Knesset after the question of Israeli aggression had been 
transferred from the Security Council to the 5th Emergency Ses- 
sion of the UN General Assembly, which, unlike the Security 
Council, had no authority to use any sanctions against Israel. 

As is known, Israel has no constitution. Instead the country 
has so-called basic laws as far as separate spheres of the state 
structure are concerned. The first such law, adopted when the 
state was formed, is the Law and Administration Ordinance, 
which determines legislative adoption and enforcement proce- 
dures, as well as the rights and responsibilities of executive author- 
ities. The Zionists decided to use this piece of legislation as the 
juridical foundation for the annexation of East Jerusalem. An 
amendment to the Ordinance adopted on June 27, 1967, provid- 
ed the Israeli Government with the authority to extend the 
juridical power of the laws of Israel and the responsibilities of 
its administrative bodies over any territory of “Eretz Israel”. An 
addendum to that amendment contained the conventional geo- 
graphic coordinates of the demarkation line of the annexed terri- 
tory. Adopted simultaneously was Amendment No. 7 to the man- 
date Municipal Corporation Ordinance of 1934, which em- 
powered the Interior Minister to expand the limits of the muni- 
cipalities over any territories mentioned in the text of the Law 
and Administration Ordinance.° 


140 


Acting on the amendments to the 1967 and 1934 legislation 
acts, on the following day, June 28, 1967, the Interior Minister 
extended the jurisdiction of all Israeli laws, administrations, and 
the municipal authorities of West Jerusalem over annexed East 
Jerusalem. 

Israel’s Labour Party administrations in power before 1977 
considered the possibility of a negative international Arab reac- 
tion and exercised a measure of caution in their approach to 
the question of Jerusalem. They did not rush to pass legislation 
which would extend Israel’s sovereignty over West Jerusalem, 
much less East Jerusalem, or attempt to actually transfer the cap- 
ital of Israel there, for they did not believe that such formal 
acts would play an important role when the time came to settle 
the issue of the final status of the city or its separate regions at 
an international forum. The primary concern of the Zionists was 
to ensure favourable conditions for actual control of Jerusalem 
and for the colonisation of its Arab quarters. They also made 
grandiose declarations regarding their claims to Jerusalem. 

When Menachem Begin came to power, he decided it was 
time to dot the “‘i’s”. On July 30, 1980, the Knesset passed the 
Basic Law proclaiming Jerusalem the capital of Israel. The first 
article of the Law read: “Jerusalem, complete and united, is an 
eternal capital of Israel’’. Additional articles dealt with mov- 
ing the President’s residence, the Knesset, government offices and 
Supreme Court into the city, and also with protecting the “Holy 
Places” and ensuring free access to them. The Law was carried 
by the votes of the party in power, the Likud, and of 11 Labour 
Party deputies.” 

Although the Law mentions a “complete and united” Jerusa- 
lem, the Knesset was not too specific about defining city limits 
and rejected the proposal of the author of the original draft, 
Geula Cohen, that Jerusalem’s borders remain the same as es- 
tablished at the end of the Six Day War. This is because the ex- 
tremists did not wish to have their hands tied if there were a 
possibility to expand the city limits in the future. Meanwhile, 
moderate deputies maintained the cautious approach they had 
practised with regard to Jerusalem ever since the time of Ben 
Gurion. 

It should be mentioned that the Carter administration was 
trying to consolidate its relations with conservative Arab regimes 


141 


in that period and was therefore dropping some tactical cour. 
tesies to them. This was seen, in particular, in the voting at the 
UN Security Council on March 1, 1980, on the resolution de. 
nouncing the setting up of Jewish settlements on the territories 
occupied by Israel, including Jerusalem, and requesting their 
dismantling. The US delegation voted in favour of this resolu. 
tion. Israel immediatelly reacted by activating the Zionist 
lobby in the USA, and as early as March 3, 1980, President 
Carter abandoned his support of this resolution at the Security 
Council for fear of losing the votes of the Jewish community. 
Thus the law on Jerusalem, passed in the summer of 1980 as 
Begin expected, did not meet with criticism on the part of the 
USA. Domestically, Begin’s hard-line policies concerning Jeru- 
salem, which at that time enjoyed the support of the majority 
of the country, actually helped the Likud Party win the parlia- 
mentary elections in Israel in June 1981. 

The world community sharply criticized the adoption of the 
1980 Law. Former Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Eban re- 
marked: “Never before has there existed such a gap between 
Israel and a united world public opinion, including our friends, 
and even the world Jewish community.”® Even pro-Israeli 
circles criticised the Law because it gave no practical advantage 
to Israel in terms of enhancing the Government’s formal 
rights in East Jerusalem, and, moreover, tended to further aggra- 
vate the Arab-Israeli conflict. The London Times wrote in its 
editorial on August 6, 1980: “The most striking feature of the 
new Israeli law making Jerusalem the country’s ‘united and un- 
divided’ capital is that it is quite unnecessary. It alters nothing, 
since the whole of Jerusalem was annexed by Israel after the Six 
Day War, and so has been in Israeli hands for the past thirteen 
years.” 


RESISTANCE OF ARABS IN 
JERUSALEM TO ZIONIST 
ANNEXATION 


When taking political or legislative action with regard to East 
Jerusalem, Israel had to take into account the political and eco- 
nomic realities emerging in that part of the occupied territory. 
After a brief “shock period” following the Six Day War, the 


142 


Arab population of the West Bank was able to organise resistance 
to the occupation, in spite of some isolated, futile attempts of 
certain “traditional” leaders to find a common language with 
the Israeli authorities. The Muslim Council was set up as early 
as July 1967, followed by the influential National Guidance 
Committee, which was organised in August, and began to fight 
for the rights of the Arab population, and, particularly, to take 
action against the expropriation of Arab lands and the building 
of Jewish quarters in East Jerusalem. All segments of Arab society 
joined the struggle. Especially active were the Union of Students 
of the West Bank and the Union of Arab Women. Widespread 
armed resistance to the occupation had unfolded by the summer 
of 1968. 

Israeli authorities responded by mass reprisals, throwing thou- 
sands of Arabs into prison and completely banning political, 
union and even cultural activities in the occupied territory. At 
the same time, the Israeli Government had a measure of interest 
in normalising the situation in order to encourage Jewish immi- 
grants to move into the city and to facilitate control over the 
Arab population. To this end, it took steps to alleviate religious 
tensions with the Muslims (this topic will later be discussed in 
greater detail), and at least partially improved the economic sit- 
uation in East Jerusalem and on the West Bank of the Jordan. 
In spite of the legislation of 1967, the Arabs in East Jerusalem 
retained the same socio-economic and Juridical status as the 
population of the occupied West Bank. In other words, the 
Arabs in Jerusalem remained citizens of Jordan, though they 
were issued Israeli identification cards. The Jerusalem Chamber 
of Commerce headed the struggle of the businessmen against the 
Israeli taxation and customs tariffs being introduced in the 
Eastern sector of the city. The Arabs having free professions re- 
fused to take Israeli qualification examinations, while business 
and some other firms refused to acquire Israeli licences. Israeli 
laws were imposed on newly created Arab firms only. The efforts 
of the Israeli Government to introduce Israeli curricula in Arab 
secondary schools and institutes of higher learning likewise ended 
in failure. After many years of struggle, a decision was made in 
1975 to allow high school students to choose between the curri- 
culum offerred for the Arabs residing in Israel and that for the 
Arabs residing on the West Bank. All Jerusalem Arab students 


143 


preferred the latter curriculum, which was identical with the Jor. 
danian one, as it would enable the students to continue thei; 
education at schools in Arab states.° 

The annexation of East Jerusalem together with the propa. 
ganda campaign about a “united and undivided” city cannot al. 
ter existing realities: to this day, Jerusalem consists of two 
mutually hostile sectors with different political ideologies, ethnic 
backgrounds and religions. ‘The process of separation between the 
Jewish and Arab communities began long before 1967, when 
mass Zionist colonisation of the city was initiated. In 1967 a 
“revival” of the city was brought about through the occupation 
of the Arab sector. This served to aggravate conflicts still furth- 
er and give them political dimension. The Israeli military author- 
ities had removed only the physical barriers obstructing move- 
ment between the two sectors of the city. To the Israeli leaders, 
“unity of the city” primarily means the possibility to freely 
requisition land in East Jerusalem and build Jewish residential 
quarters in that part of the city. 

This is what the Israeli magazine The Jerusalem Quarterly 
wrote when analysing the present situation between the Arabs 
and the Jews in “united” Jerusalem: “However, also in the 
reunited city, Jews and Arabs continued to form two distinct 
communities with defined ethnic, religious and national identi- 
ties, distinct socio-economic characteristics, and a particular 
geographic distribution... Both sectors continued to maintain 
their distinct business centres, ... separate chambers of commerce 
and professional organisations and even parallel fire brigades 
and first-aid services... Jewish private enterprises continued to 
be located exclusively in the city’s Jewish sections... All the 
new Jewish hotels built after 1967 ... actually arose on the 
Western side of the former dividing line ... Jewish buses retained 
the concession over West Jerusalem and the lines connecting 
this part of the city with the new Jewish neighbourhoods in 
East Jerusalem. This arrangement differed from that reached by 
local Jewish and Arab taxis, where both circulated freely all over 
the city... Personal matters (like marriage, divorce etc.) were 
left to the Christian and Muslim religious courts of East Jerusa- 
lem who continued to operate without being integrated into 
parallel existing institutions of Israel’s religious minorities, or 
even subject in any way to the Israeli legal system.” ‘The maga- 


144 


zine emphasised in particular that “... Jerusalem remained, in 
fact, a divided city, ethnically, nationally, and most of all, politic- 
ally.”*° 

As far as the economic aspect of the problem is concerned, the 
average personal income in the Arab sector is. less than one 
third that of the Jewish sector; moreover, economic dependence 
on the Jewish sector is almost complete.” 

Although the barbed-wire and brick walls which divided West 
and East Jerusalem were eliminated in 1967, the city still re- 
mains divided into two sectors by the so-called “neutral zone’. Ac- 
cording to the American New York Times Magazine, “the city 
does remain divided, honeycombed by complex psychological 
barriers more resilient than bricks and mortar.’’?? 

The scope of resistance of the Arabs in Jerusalem to Zionist 
aggression largely depends on the successful struggle of the Pales- 
tine Liberation Organisation, which has won great prestige and 
influence in the occupied sector of Jerusalem. The report of the 
PLO delegation at the UN Geneva International Conference on 
the Palestinian Question (September 1983) pointed out, “We 
have now entered a decisive fight to the finish in order to raise 
the banner of our people over Jerusalem, the capital of our 
free state.” The declaration adopted at the Geneva Conference 
stated that all the occupying power’s (Israel) administrative and 
legislative measures and acts which promoted change (or envi- 
saged change) in the character and status of Jerusalem, includ- 
ing the expropriation of land and property there, and, in partic- 
ular, the so-called “basic law” declaring Jerusalem the capital 
of Israel, were invalid. 

The legitimate rights of the Palestinian Arabs in Jerusalem 
are strongly supported by the socialist states, Arab and Muslim 
countries, and, especially, the Organisation of the Islamic Con- 
ference, which created a special Jerusalem Committee in 1975 and 
the Jerusalem Fund a year later. 

Zionist Colonisation of East Jerusalem. The Zionist occupa- 
tion of East Jerusalem and the 1967 and 1980 legislation acts 
passed by the Knesset heightened the tensions between the two 
sectors of the city to a breaking point. The Zionists began a me- 
thodic colonisation of the Arab sector despite the many UN 
resolutions denouncing steps towards changing the status of East 
Jerusalem and its suburbs. Referring to the laws passed by the Knesset in June 1967, Israeli authorities started confiscating prj. 
vately owned land in the occupied section of the city. As for the 
land registered as belonging to Jordan, the Israeli Government 
considered it to automatically come under Israeli jurisdiction by 
the force of the same 1967 laws. The Zionist “mastering” of 
East Jerusalem was occurring at such a rapid pace that the 
authorities found it necessary to rescind a long-time regulation 
which required the archeological study of plots of land in Jerusa- 
lem prior to the start of any development projects. Gattan observed: 
“As to the two arguments on which Israel relies for its 
colonisation of occupied territory, namely, a ‘biblical’ right to 
settle the land of Palestine and a right to establish settlements 
for ‘security reasons’, the first is an absurdity and the second is a 
fake... The High Court... rejected the contention made by the 
promoters of the settlement for that the Jews possess a ‘biblical 
right to settle in the West Bank.” 

The colonisation process began not with land confiscation, 
but with settling Israeli citizens in the Old City and other areas 
of Arab Jerusalem immediately after the war of 1967. The polit- 
ical decision to settle Jewish residents within so-called Greater 
Jerusalem* was taken by the Israeli Government on August 13, 
1967. In October 1967, a Jewish religious school was relocated 
into the Old City, while by December of the same year, the 
number of migrants residing there had reached 200. The migra- 
tion of Jews into the occupied territories occurred not only in 
the city itself, but also in the corridor linking Jerusalem with the 
coast of the Mediterranean Sea and in the eastern suburbs. 

To date, the Israeli Government has issued four decrees on the 
confiscation of major areas in East Jerusalem. The first decree, 
of April 18, 1968, covered 12 hectares of land along the Wailing 
Wall and in the Jewish quarter of the Old City. This expropriat- 
ed land exceeded the total area of the Jewish quarter and ex- 
tended into the adjacent part of the Armenian quarter.** Only 
a few selected patches of land in those quarters escaped exprop- 
riation—those registered as “waqf”.** Historically, most of the 
Jewish quarter belonged to well-off Arab families who leased 
their houses to Jews. During the Israeli occupation of East 


* Jerusalem within the borders as established by the Israeli author- 
ities on June 27, 1967. 
** An Arab term denoting lands belonging to mosques (Ed.). 


146 


Jerusalem the Old City’s Jewish quarter expanded to four times 
its pre-1948 size.?5 

Large-scale development of Jewish quarters in the city’s Arab 
sector began when Israeli authorities requisitioned 340 hectares 
of land on January 1, 1969, to build highrise buildings in the 
Ramat Eshkol and Givat Shapira (former French Hill) quar- 
ters that linked the Jewish sector of the city with the Israeli en- 
clave on Mount Scopus. The third and the largest requisitioning 
of land in East Jerusalem, 1,620 hectares (16.2 sq. km), was 
made on August 20, 1970. The Jewish quarters of Gillo and 
East Talptyyot are being developed on that land in the south 
and Ramot quarter in the north. 

The requisitioning of isolated patches of land in East Jerusa- 
lem has continued. The latest major action was the expropria- 
tion of about 450 hectares of land on March 11, 1980, for the 
purpose of linking together the quarters of Newe Ya’aqov and 
Givat Shapira which lie 8 kilometres apart.1® Pisgat Omar, a 
part of a 12,000-unit housing project, is to accommodate some 
3,500 units for supporters of religious parties.17 Israel has ap- 
propriated a territory of about 24 sq. km, or one-third of the 
entire area of East Jerusalem. Moreover, according to Israeli 
sources, Israeli authorities have already requisitioned, or are 
planning to do so in keeping with their development projects, 
over half of the total area of East Jerusalem.?® 

The Mayor of Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek, wrote in 1977: “We 
built mainly on rocky ground newly incorporated into the city. 
We used no wooden land or land that was employed for agri- 
culture.”*® However, he failed to mention another peculiarity of 
the colonisation that was reported from Jerusalem by a Reuters 
correspondent in mid-1979 that the strategic value of these areas 
was taken into consideration in their development: they are all 
located on the hills, close to the major routes, making it possible 
to cut off the three major Arab centres from each other in case 
of need—East Jerusalem, Vifleem and Ramallu. 

Considering the great expenditures required for speedily set- 
ting up Zionist settlements over the entire territory of the West 
Bank*, the Begin Government had to curtail somewhat its col- 


* US sources estimate that settling a Jewish family on the West 
Bank costs the Israeli Government about $90,000 (The Christian 
Science Monitor, August 17, 1983). 


10" 147 


onising activity on other occupied territories, including Eay 
Jerusalem where, in the opinion of Zionist leaders, enough haq 
been done in the first ten years of the occupation. Recently, pyj. 
vate investments have been channelled into East Jerusalem t, 
enlarge the Jewish quarters. The Israeli press reported in Sep. 
tember 1983 that 125 luxury villas are planned for construction 
under the Nof Zahav project, mostly for American millionaires 
at a total cost of $20 million. The area to be developed is located 
on a hillside facing the city, the site of the High Commissioner’ 
residence at the time of the British Mandate.”° 

Colonisation of the Jerusalem Suburbs. The only tie between 
West Jerusalem and Israel’s seashore plane before 1967 was a 
single road along a narrow corridor. Following its aggressive 
actions, Israel set up a number of settlements north of the cor. 
ridor on the West Bank, including Givon and Modiim neighbour. 
hoods, and started building the town of Givon in 1980. To fan 
out the southern part of the corridor, work was begun to quickly 
rebuild Gush Etzyon neighbourhood, which had 4 settlements be- 
fore its residents were evacuated in 1948 and now has about 
ten settlements including the town of Efrat where a few thous- 
and houses were constructed in 1980.”* 

At the close of the 1960s, Israel’s Defence Minister Moshe 
Dayan decided to “close” a state-owned area of 71 sq. km on 
the eastern side of so-called Greater Jerusalem, i.e., to ban all 
Arab business activity in the area.?? After the war of 1973, col- 
onisation in that area was accelerated. The whole town of 
Adumim (the so-called “industrial zone”) rose there after a few 
years, to say nothing of scattered settlements. The settlements 
around Jerusalem were given the “biblical” name of Land of 
Benjamin. Lately, the construction of such “satellite cities” has 
been given much attention. Thus, aside from the colonisation 
of Jerusalem proper, the city is being surrounded on all sides 
with a dense network of Jewish settlements. 

Israel’s Expansionist Plans with Regard to Jerusalem. Israeli 
leaders do not try to conceal their plans for expanding Greater 
Jerusalem. On the eve of the parliamentary elections of 1981, 
Begin already spoke of Jerusalem and Adumim as one entity 
(“We built 9,000 apartments in Jerusalem, including Mavale 
Adumim”). On November 30, 1981, Newsweek magazine pub- 
lished an article about Israeli plans for developing Jerusalem 


148 


which called for the building of Greater Jerusalem with a Jewish 
population of 500,000 by the year 2010. 

The Change in the Demographic Structure. 194,000 Jews and 
70,900 non-Jews lived in Jerusalem after the whole of the city 
was seized by Israel in 1967 and its limits expanded. Immedi- 
ately after the cessation of hostilities, Israeli authorities launched 
4 campaign to move Arab residents from Jerusalem to the West 
Bank and Jordan. The Arab residents of the city who happened 
to be outside Jerusalem at the end of the war were denied 
permission to enter the city for permanent residence. Since then, 
the Arab population has increased exclusively through nat- 
ural growth and “illegal” infiltration from the West Bank. 

The population growth in Jerusalem after the occupation of 
‘ts eastern sector is shown in the table below (thous.)”* 


a 


Year Jews Arabs City’s total 
Muslims Christ.* Total population 


a 


1967 194 08 12.9 70.9 264.9 
1977 260 90 13.7 103.7 375 
1981 295 100.3 16.7 117 412 


¢ The number of Christians includes both Arabs and non-Arabs. 


The growth of the Jewish population is mostly accounted for 
by new immigrants, since internal Jewish migrations in Jerusalem 
were negligible. Most of the arrivals settled in the new quarters 
of East Jerusalem. Up to 60 thousand Jews resided in those quar- 
ters in 1981. 

It has become known of late that in 1981 Jewish emigration 
from Jerusalem exceeded the number of Jews entering Jerusalem. 
According to Mayor Kollek, this process intensified in the two 
following years. It is explained by the fact that part of the 
city’s Jewish population moved to new settlements being set up 
on the West Bank. 

Most Christians (Orthodox, Catholics, Armenians, Greek 
Catholics) reside in the Old City. Most Arab Protestants live in 
the Northern Zone. As of 1978, the main Christian denomina- 
tions in Jerusalem were: Greek Orthodox (3,000), Armenian Or- 
thodox (1,200), Armenian Catholic (210), Greek Catholic 
(335), Roman Catholic (4,210), Anglican (200), Lutheran 
(400) .24 Most Jerusalem Muslims are Sunnites. 


149 


Religious Aspect. After the occupation of East Jerusalem, Israqy 
did not care to reinstate the status quo regarding religious site, 
known as “Holy Places”. This principle has been in use for Over 
two centuries by the Turkish authorities, the British Mandate aq. 
ministration, and the Jordanian Government (the latter did not 
extend this principle to cover the Judaic sacred sites at the Wai}. 
ing Wall and on the Mount of Olives). Already on June 10 
1967, Israeli occupation authorities began to enlarge the area . 
front of the Wailing Wall by pulling down the structures belong. 
ing to the Muslims, including two small mosques, and by evict. 
ing 650 Arab citizens from al-Mughrabi. Moreover, the citizens 
of the quarter were allowed just one hour to pack, after which 
the bulldozers started destroying Arab homes. This barbarous 
act was in defiance of a centuries-old regulation, which was leg. 
ally adopted and according to which the Wailing Wall, as an 
integral part of Haram-el-Sharif—the major Muslim sacred site 
in Palestine—and its adjacent area, were under the sole owner- 
ship of Muslims, while the Jews were only allowed free access to 
the Wall for the purpose of devotions.” 

But Muslims were alarmed even further by Israel’s intention 
to gain possession of Haram-el-Sharif itself, to open it for Judaic 
worshiping and erect synagogues there. A few hours after the 
seizure of the Old City, the Chief Rabbi of the Israel Army, 
Goren, conducted prayers in Haram-el-Sharif and then proposed 
to build a synagogue on the esplanade of Mosque al-Aqsa.?° In 
August 1967, the Israeli Minister of Religious Affairs declared 
that, in his opinion, Haram-el-Sharif belonged to the Jews, as 
it was bought “in the days of David”.?’ 

In 1975, J. Hazan, one of the leaders of the Zionist Mapam 
Party, suggested in his proposal for settling the Jerusalem issue 
that a special place be fenced off on a mount where Haram-el- 
Sharif is situated for the Jews to. conduct their prayers. The 
entire Muslim world was especially shaken by the Zionists’ burn- 
ing of Mosque al-Aqsa on August 21, 1969. 

It should be noted that immediately following the capture of 
East Jerusalem, Israeli authorities attempted to establish control 
over the affairs of the Muslim community, just as in 1948 with 
regard to Muslim residents in Israel. However, determined re- 
sistance from the Muslim establishment of the entire West Bank 
crushed these plans, Supported by prominent public figures, 


150 


Muslim organisations in East Jerusalem organised the re-es- 
tablishmient of the Muslim Council as early as July 24, 1967, an 
organ similar to the one existing at the time of the British Man- 
date. The Muslim Council appointed the chief qadi (a Muslim 
judge) of the West Bank, assumed the responsibility for appoint- 
ing waqf directors and took control of Haram-el-Sharif. The 
Muslim Council was granted de facto recognition by Israeli 
authorities.”* Israeli troops left the territory of Haram-el-Sharif 
as early as June 11, 1967, and on June 17 the shrine was turned 
over to Muslim organisations for supervision. 

In March 1983, supporters of Rabbi Kahane, former leader of 
the terrorist Jewish Defence League and now head of the extrem- 
ist religious Kach Party in Israel, planned an “operation” to 
penetrate Haram-el-Sharif via an underground tunnel. Armed 
with machine-guns and rifles, the men aimed to seize the major 
Muslim shrine in Jerusalem, the Dome of the Rock, and to set 
up a Jewish settlement there. The operation was planned for a 
Friday evening when the mosque would be full of worshippers. 
The attack was thwarted by the Israeli police who feared a back- 
lash from indignant Muslims. House arrested were twenty-nine 
conspirators from Kiryat Arba, a settlement of religious fanatics 
headed by Y. Ariel, former rabbi of the city of Yamit (on Sinai), 
who was runner-up from the Kach Party in the parliamentary 
elections of 1981. Half a year later, in October 1983, a Jerusalem 
court found all the conspirators not guilty and released them. 

This is but one example of Zionist defilement of a Muslim 
shrine. In April 1982, an American immigrant, Israeli army 
soldier Alan Harry Goodman, opened fire in the same Dome of 
the Rock killing two people and wounding 11 people. Another 
man was killed and seven people wounded by Israeli police try- 
ing to save Goodman from the wrath of the crowd. 

Other religious fanatics, pupils of the Hasidic Yeshibah Birkat 
Avraham located in the Muslim quarter of the Old City, often 
attack residents of the quarter, threaten them with knives, shat- 
ter windows. They beat an Arab woman till she lost conscious- 
ness, vandalised the aparment of a Muslim neighbour, and 
also tried to break into Haram-el-Sharif. 

As for different Christian church denominations in Jerusalem, 
the Israeli Government tried to reach an agreement with the 
Vatican which would give the Catholic Church privileges at 


11 


the expense of other religious communities, primarily the Ortho- 
dox Church. It was Israel’s Ambassador to Rome, Ehud Avrie} 
who started the negotiations in June 1967. He proposed that the 
Pontiff sign an agreement according to which Israel would rec- 
ognise the Pope as the coordinator of all Christian groups in 
Jerusalem. The secret negotiations continued in 1968 by 
Yaacov Herzog, Director of the Prime Minister’s Office. The 
Israeli proposals included changing the status quo of the Chris- 
tian Holy Places by giving the Catholics senior status at the ex- 
pense of Eastern communities; by recognising the Pope as the 
representative of all the Christian groups in Jerusalem, and grant- 
ing diplomatic immunity to the religious missions in the Holy 
Places. In return for this favour, the Israelis wished the Vatican 
to recognise Israel’s sovereignty over unified Jerusalem. This was 
however declined, but the talks were continued by Foreign Min- 
ister Eban in 1969 and by Prime Minister Meir in 1973.?° 

Acts of hostility and vandalism are being committed by Israeli 
extremists not only against Muslims, but also against Christian 
holy places and clergy in Jerusalem. Jerusalem was swept by a 
wave of threats and provocations against Christian organisations 
in the late 70s and early 80s. For example, Zionist thugs would 
attack a Baptist church and humiliate priests. They scratched 
profanities on the walls of the Bible Society, looted and set fire 
to a store selling Christian literature. Even officials from the 
Jerusalem Municipality admitted that Christian churches had 
suffered damage amounting to $30,000. Christian church repre- 
sentatives sent an official protest to Prime Minister Begin on 
February 1, 1980. 

A Russian ecclesiastical mission of the Moscow Orthodox Pat- 
riarchate has been located in Jerusalem for many years, as well 
as a Russian Orthodox Convent in Ein-Karem. In the spring of 
1983, Zionist fanatics surrounded the Convent and painted “Get 
out of Here” on its walls (as well as on the fence of the nearby 
Catholic church). Two nuns (mother and daughter) were killed 
in their cell in May 1983. 

In the period following 1967, Israeli authorities have given 
priority to trying to establish a basis in international politics and 
law for the occupation of East Jerusalem and for its colonisation, 
which is aimed at modifying the city’s demographic structure in 
favour of Israel, Considering the religious aspect of the problem 


Joa 


and the process of Israeli naturalisation of the Arab population 
of the Eastern sector, these issues are currently being played 
down so as not to aggravate the situation in the city, which 1s 
already tense enough after the unsuccessful attempts in this direc- 
tion made in the early period of the occupation. 


References 
1. H. Cattan, Jerusalem, Croom Helm, London, 1981, p. 93. 


9. Ibid., p. 51. 

3. Ibid., p. 44. 

4.§. Flapan, Zionism and the Palestinians, Croom Helm, 
London, 1979, p. 302. 

5. See H. Cattan, Op. cit., p. 49. 


6. See M. Benvenisti, Jerusalem: the Torn City. The Univer- 
sity of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1976, p. 114. 


7, Israel and Palestine Monthly Review, Supplement to 
No. 89, December 1980, p. 2. 
8. Yeddioth Aharonoth, August 1, 1980. 


9. Jerusalem, Problems and Prospects, Ed. by Joel L. Kraem- 
er, Praeger Publishers, New York, 1980, pp. 112-114. 


10. The Jerusalem Quarterly, No. 19, Spring 1981, p. 23, 41, 
43-44, 


11. Ibid., p. 14. 
12. New York Times Magazine, December 14, 1980, p. 90. 
13. H. Cattan, Op. cit., p. 87. 


14. Ibid., p. 82. 
15. Middle East International, No. 197, March 31, 1983, p. 20. 


16. International Herald Tribune, March 12, 1980, p. 4. 
17. Jerusalem Post International, No. 1099, 1981, p. 7. 
18. Zo Gaderech, August 20 and 27, 1980. 

19. Foreign Affairs, July 1977, p. 713. 

20. Jerusalem Post International, No, 1194, 1983, p. 20. 


13 


ya 
22. 
29. 


24. 


20: 


26. 


27. 


28. 
29. 


Yedioth Aharonoth, August 20, 1980. 
See M. Benvenisti, Op. cit., p. 248. 


Compiled by the author, based on Jerusalem Post Interna. 
tional 4-10, 1981; The Jerusalem Quarterly, Spring 1981, 
No. 19. 


The Middle East Journal, Washington, Vol. 37, No. 1, 
Winter 1983, p. 60. 


See “The Rights and Claims of Moslems and Jews in Con. 
nection with the Wailing Wall at Jerusalem’, the Instj. 
tute of Palestinian Studies, Beirut 1968, pp. 73-74. 


See H. Cattan, Op. cit., p. 74. 

Ibid., p. 73. 

The New East, 1979, Vol. XXVIII, Nos 1-2, pp. I-IV. 
See M. Benvenisti, Op. cit., p. 268-69. 


S. Tarasov 


THE GOAL JUSTIFIES 
THE MEANS 


The goals and objectives of Zionism, as formulated by the 
programme adopted at the 2/th Zionist Congress in 1968, pre- 
suppose, above all, the strengthening of the state of Israel, unit- 
ing the Jews of the whole world around the “cultural and spirit- 
ual centre” in Israel, gathering Jews in their “historical home- 
land”, the growing isolation of Jews in the Diaspora, including 
the expansion there of Jewish upbringing and education, es- 
pecially among the youth. As formerly, it all sounds very proper 
and is intended to inspire the Jews in the Diaspora to new “feats” 
in the name of these “noble” aims, to create the impression that 
this is being done solely in the interests of the “Jewish people” 
and for their benefit. However, as one asks the question, whom 
does it benefit, on whose money and by what means is it being 
implemented, and, in general, what “Jewish people” it concerns 
—one realises that under this seemingly decent signboard a dan- 
gerous and costly adventure has been purposefully implemented 
over the decades. The main characters in it are international 
Zionism, that offspring and weapon of the Jewish big bourgeot- 
sie, and the imperialist circles of the USA and other Western 
countries who are using Zionism in their military-political and 
economic interests. The alliance of these is restricted, for its 
source is capitalism with its bourgeois ideology and international 
antagonisms, which are invariably accompanied by chauvinism 
and nationalism. It is on this basis that political Zionism in all 
its different forms appeared beginning with the honied Zion- 
ism of the labour parties and ending with the militant “revision- 
ist Zionism” of Vladimir Jabotinsky. In accordance with the 
socio-political outlook in the Diaspora countries, and the concrete 
objectives being pursued, the correlation of forces on the in- 


199 


ternational arena and the interests of its chief ally at a given 
stage Zionism changed its colouring, but never its essence. 

The Zionists have never scrupled as to the choice of means and 
methods for achieving their goals. Murder, terror, blackmail and 
threats, intrigues and slander, treachery and lies—this is a far 
from complete list of means in the arsenal of international Zion- 
ism. Nevertheless, Zionism has always sought to preserve its 
outward attractiveness for all social strata of Jewry through re- 
course to demagogic slogans and pseudo-socialistic phraseology. 
However, at the present stage, which is characterised by a sharp 
ideological and political polarisation between imperialism, on 
the one hand, and the forces of progress and socialism, on 
the other, Zionism is increasingly forced to disclose its true face, 
The groundlessness and reactionary content of Zionism’s con- 
cepts and purposes are most clearly seen in the policy of the 
Israeli ruling circles. 

At the 1977 elections in the person of the right-extremist gov- 
ernment of Menachem Begin, the “revisionist Zionism” of Vla- 
dimir Jabotinsky, which for a long period had been in the op- 
position, advanced to key roles in Israeli political life. The doc- 
trine of this ideologue of militant nationalism best of all suited 
the strategic plans of international Zionism and imperialism in 
the Middle East, which were aimed at direct aggression and an- 
nexation of the lands of neighbouring Arab countries, and at 
the suppression and exploitation of the Arab population of the 
occupied territories in violation of international law and the UN 
Charter. The invariable adherence to the tactic of the “revision- 
ists’, which was first used in mandated Palestine by the terror- 
ists of the Irgun Zvai Leumi’, was consonant with the adoption 
by the Begin government of a whole series of right-extremist 
political, economic and military decisions. As the official ideology 
of Israel, Zionism in the “revisionist” edition of Vladimir Jabo- 
tinsky determines today the home and foreign policy of this 
state, which is a constant source of tension in the Middle East. 

It is common knowledge that the solution of the Palestine 
question is the key to a Middle East settlement, that is, the 
implementation of the lawful rights of the Palestine Arabs to 
self-determination and the creation of their own independent 
state. Let us try to follow the sources of the present-day obstruc- 
tionist position of the Israeli rulers on this question. We address 


196 


ourselves to the “theoretical heritage” of Vladimir Jabotinsky, 
the leader of the “revisionists”. “All realistically thinking people, 
with the exception of those born blind,” he wrote, “have long 
realised that to get the Palestine Arabs to voluntarily accept the 
conversion of Palestine from an Arab country into a country with 
a Jewish majority, is something quite impossible.’ ‘To break the 
will of the Palestinians, the “revisionists” created the above- 
mentioned Irgun Zvai Leumi terrorist organisation. Asserting 
the “moral right” of the Zionists to drive the Arabs from their 
land, Jabotinsky asserted that “the land belongs not to those who 
have a lot of it, but to those who haven’t any”’.’ This slogan was 
adopted by the Zionist bourgeoisie, which began investing capi- 
tal in the “colonisation” of Palestine by thousands of Jewish 
immigrants. 

The illiterate fellahs had no opportunity to acquaint them- 
selves with Jabotinsky’s “works” in which the hypocritical ex- 
pression of regret in respect to the “insurmountable cultural gap 
between the two peoples”,* the conclusion on the need for a 
“polite removal’’® of the Arabs and the inevitability of “some 
unpleasantness to the rest of the Palestine population”® (read 
Arabs.—S.T.) accompanied by statements to the effect that 
“| the people whose defence is left in the hands of another 
people cannot advance conditions’”’ in effect substantiated the 
methods of brigandage and territorial expansion, which subse- 
quently became the cornerstone of Israeli policy towards the Pa- 
lestinians and the neighbouring Arab states. 

Comparing Israel’s social structure to a cream torte, Israeli 
publicist Uri Avneri noted that “the first layer 1s Israeli Jew- 
ish.... In the next layer are the Israeli Arabs who have formal 
democratic rights but, in practice, they are not genuinely free. ... 
Arabs in the occupied territories constitute the third layer. They 
live under the worst type of colonial regime with no political or 
human rights. In the meantime, they are exploited as cheap labour 
without any protection.”® 

Speaking at a meeting of the UN Special Committee on Pal- 
estine, Adeyemi, the representative of Nigeria, noted: “The Is- 
raeli concept of coexistence (with the Arabs.—S.T.) was there- 
fore not one of equals but one between a dominant invader 
and the subordinate indigenous population, kept docile by a 
combination of military force and political and economic in- 


157 


ducements. Those were the. classic devices employed by the Unit. 
ed Kingdom and many other colonial empires.”’* In order to 
maintain this situation in the occupied territories, the Israe]; 
authorities preserve intact the extraordinary laws of the period of 
the British mandate, against which the Zionists themselves had 
fought in their time. Today this colonialist legislation is being 
used to deprive the Palestinians of their national awareness, 
break their resistance, force them to become reconciled with 
their slavish condition or to emigrate. However, the areas seized 
on the West Bank of the Jordan and the Gaza sector are only 
part of the territory of the so-called “Greater Israel’, to which 
the Zionist followers of Jabotinsky lay claim. “In our Herzlian 
world view,” he wrote, “we do not recognise the right of citizen- 
ship for any ideal, except one: a Jewish majority on both banks 
of the Jordan as a first step for the creation of a Jewish State.” 

Almost fifty years later, speaking at the Knesset on March 2, 
1983, former Israeli Foreign Minister and present Prime Minis- 
ter Yitzhak Shamir commented as follows on the official policy 
of the state: “We did not conquer the territories from their leg- 
al owners but liberated them from the countries that conquered 
them in 1948. We have not annexed them.... They are part 
of the Biblical lands of Israel and what is part of your country 
you do not annex.’? 

To substantiate the “Biblical right” to the ‘Promised Land” 
the Zionists widely resort to juggling and falsification of facts. 
However, they often lose all sense of proportion, and then the 
discrepancies and the gap between “theoretical” propositions 
and objective reality become quite obvious. In one section of 
his pamphlet The Jewish State Jabotinsky prophesied: “... in 
the future Palestine will turn into a laboratory in which there 
will be found by a special method ... medicine for healing all 
humanity.”?? And further, speaking of the special role of “the 
Jewish people” in creating the “spiritual culture of the world”: 
“But among them (other peoples of the world—S.T.) there 1s 
not a single one whose participation is as great in one sphere: 
the sphere of regulation of the social regime.”™* 

Even a cursory acquaintance with the conditions of present- 
day Israeli society and the policy of its leadership demolishes 
Jabotinsky’s “prophecies”. The world is often feverish due to 
the “medicine” called “Zionist practice”, which from time to 


158 


time is “injected” into the arteries of the international situation, 
and Israel’s social regime differs in no way from any capitalist 
state, save perhaps by its growing foreign-policy extremism and 
aggressiveness. Sharp social contradictions between the Sephard- 
‘m and the Ashkenazim, a severe economic crisis and inexorably 
rising inflation (despite the colossal economic and financial aid 
of the USA and the West, generally), growing crime and drug 
addiction, speculation and corruption—such are the problems 
which continually plague this “laboratory” 

Anticipating the inevitable contradictions between labour and 
capital, Jabotinsky proposed in his time the following “recipe”: 
“As long as the process of creating a Jewish State is continuing, 
a capitalist for us is not a capitalist, and a worker, not a worker. 
Both one and the other are for us material for the state that 
is being built ... all forms of class struggle should be considered 
national treason.’’** One can readily see that this statement is in 
complete harmony with the theoretical propositions of Zionism, 
which reject class struggle and declare all Jews brothers irres- 
pective of their social position, well-being and domicile. Criticis- 
ing the Zionist thesis on the existence of a single “Jewish nation”, 
V. I. Lenin pointed out that “this Zionist idea is absolutely false 
and essentially reactionary.”?> Karl Marx in his work “On the 
Jewish Question” and Frederick Engels in the article “The Hous- 
ing Question” proved that the concept of “Jewry”’ is unscientific, 
that the difference between the moneybag Jews and the Jews who 
sell their labour is as great as that between the wealthy and the 
poor in any bourgeois state. Therefore the. advocation of class 
peace only plays into the hands of the Zionist bourgeoisie, which 
deliberately cultivates nationalism and chauvinism, and in case 
of necessity unhesitatingly resorts to punitive measures against 
those who oppose them, declaring them “national traitors”. But 
coming into direct conflict with the “masses”, who are destined 
to build and perfect the classless idyll concocted by the Zion- 
ists, is pointless and even dangerous. Being aware of this, Jabot- 
insky nurtured a “plan of organising a mandatory National Ar- 
bitration in the conflicts between labour and capital”,’® which 
was subsequently realised in the form of labour arbitration for 
regulating disputes between workers and employers. 

However, this arbitration is usually a mere formality. The prob- 
lems remain unsolved, while the managers resort to fines and 


159 


dismissals. The strikes of workers and other employees in Israg| 
are expanding with every passing year. After an almost half. 
year general strike of doctors in 1983, the government was forceq 
to make concessions and partially to satisfy their demands 
This and many other facts refute the myth of a classless Zion. 
ist paradise. 

Despite favourable financial conditions for the country’s eco. 
nomic development, the Israeli economy is periodically experienc. 
ing severe economic crises. The most recent one developed ip 
connection with the aggression in Lebanon and entailed a 25 
per cent devaluation of Israeli currency, reduction of subsidies 
for basic products, mounting prices on prime necessities and 
a number of food products, fuel and electricity. 

Meanwhile against the background of steadily worsening liv. 
ing standards of the working people, the Israeli government’s 
course towards an unbridled militarisation of the economy re. 
mains unchanged. The speedy growth of the military-industrial 
complex is ensured by the continuous flow into Israel of funds 
from all parts of the world. This flow is comprised of several 
sources: loans, credits (on extremely favourable terms), grants 
from the imperialist states (the USA, the FRG, Britain and 
other Western countries); donations from Jewish communities 
in capitalist countries and the spread abroad of numerous Israe- 
li state bonds. These sources form the basis of the country’s fi- 
nancial and economic structure, which is turning into a parasite 
state. As we know, the Zionist “donations” have been acquired 
through the exploitation of both the Jewish masses and the 
working people of other nationalities. Incidentally, the idea of 
“universal national loans” also belongs to Jabotinsky. 

Of the colossal aid to the Israeli Zionists planned by the United 
States, which is to rise to the sum of $1,700 million in 1983-1984, 
over $700 million are earmarked for buying US weapons and 
military equipment, which is designed to ensure that Israel’s 
conception of “national interests” be “compatible in all significant 
details with American objectives, both declared and implicit”.” 
This alliance with the most aggressive imperialist circles, which 
are a threat to peace, is far from accidental. 

When the interests of Britain and the Zionists in mandated 
Palestine clashed, the centre of international Zionism was grad- 
ually transferred to the USA, which became its natural partner 


160 


in the struggle against Britain for positions in the region. The 
fierce lobbying by the Zionist prior to and in the course of the 
Second World War bore fruit. From 1943 US government cir- 
cles began openly to support the Zionist designs in the Middle 
East, taking into consideration not only their own strategic in- 
terests, but also the considerable influence which the Zionist big 
bourgeoisie had already exerted on the country’s political life 
as a whole and the outcome of presidential elections in particular. 

Relations between the USA and Israel are complicated in 
many ways, owing above all to the existence of not only inter- 
government and private capitalist ties, but also close relations 
between the two main centres of international Zionism—the USA 
and Israel. The 17th Congress of the Communist Party of Israel 
gave the following analysis of the interrelation between the USA 
and Israel: “The ruling circles of Israel are more than ever de- 
pendent on U.S. imperialism. Yet the Israeli ruling circles try to 
influence the U.S. policy in certain affairs, sometimes even at- 
taining success in this endeavour, to promote the interests of Is- 
raeli bourgeoisie and zionism. Nevertheless, the interrelation of 
the U.S. and Israeli governing circles is basically that of Israel 
following the American imperialists’ lead, the latter acting ac- 
cording to their own interests.’”’?® 

The existence of an influential Zionist lobby in the USA sub- 
stantially restricts, however, the possibility of Washington’s di- 
rect pressure on Israel. This is particularly noticeable during elec- 
tion campaigns, when the Zionists are able to get concessions 
from the US administration in return for the votes of the Jewish 
electorate. 

The widespread system of international Zionism, with its main 
centres in the USA and Israel, functions by taking into consid- 
eration the slightest fluctuations in the political situation. Con- 
cerned with the preparation of “reserves” in the Diaspora coun- 
tries, the Zionists have always devoted special attention to the 
education of the Jewish youth in the spirit of “Zionist values”. 

Jabotinsky was aware of the appeal of Marxist ideas and the 
attractive force of their practical realisation by the Great October 
Socialist Revolution for the younger generation. So he devoted 
a significant part of his activity to anti-communist, anti-Soviet 
brainwashing of the Zionist youth. This objective was pursued 
by the creation of the Beitar youth organisation, whose slogan 


11579 161 


was “Had nes” (“One Banner”). This slogan is explained jp 
the new Concise Jewish Encyclopedia as the “single goal ag 
opposed to the duality of socialist ideology, a goal in which the 
class and national objectives are united’’.’® 

We are dealing here with narrow nationalistic interests that 
are realised with the use of all available means. The fact that 
the Beitar’s “spiritual father” Jabotinsky was from 1929 the 
leader of the Irgun Zvai Leumi terrorist organisation, which was 
responsible for the murder of innocent Arab citizens in the vil- 
lage of Deir Yassin and other brutalities with regard to the 
Arab population who justly opposed the Zionist expansion, will 
give an idea of the practical purpose of the training of youth 
in the Beitar. The continuity of Jabotinsky’s ideas is felt in the 
present-day programme of the Beitar, which sides with the ex- 
treme rightist Zionist Herut party, which was for many years 
headed by Jabotinsky’s associate Menachem Begin. Numerous 
branches of this youth organisation have been created in the 
USA, Britain and other capitalist countries. 

A characteristic tendency of the Jewish communities of the 
Diaspora is the process of assimilation. Moreover, the tendency 
towards assimilation is higher in so-called academaim* circles, 
the most educated social strata that are least influenced by Zion- 
ist propaganda. Taking this into consideration, A. Dultzin, Presi- 
dent of the World Zionist Organisation, in his work Eight Critical 
Issues, devoted to the basic trends of modernisation of “classic” 
Zionism and its adaptation to present-day conditions, paid much 
attention to what Jabotinsky called means of “artificial isola- 
tion”,?° including above all inculcation of a feeling of superiority 
over other people, and cultural-religious isolation. The tactics 
of the Zionists is a stage-by-stage affair and includes: expan- 
sion of “Jewish” upbringing and education of the children and 
youth, including the study of Jewish history, culture, and the 
Hebrew language, accustoming them to Judaism, organising trips 
to Israel and their gradual drawing into Zionist activity. For the 
achievement of these aims numerous funds, programmes, and 
seminars have been set up in Israel as well as in other countries. 


* The Hebrew word academaim is a broad concept, embracing peo- 
ple of the Jewish nationality with a higher education, professors and 
teachers, scientists and the professions.—S.T. 


162 


All this is done on a broad scale and is generously financed by 
the Zionist bourgeoisie. This activity is conducted under diverse 
demagogic slogans, but essentially it implies making Zionism one’s 
personal world view, compelling one to actions, depriving the 
exponents of this world view of a class-social basis, forcing them 
to emigrate to Israel or actively to co-operate with the Zionists. 

As we see, the objectives facing Zionism, and the ways of 
their attainment in the 1970-1980s not only have much in com- 
mon with the ideas of Jabotinsky, the theoretician of “revisionist 
Zionism”, but are a direct development and logical continua- 
tion of the course charted by him for an alliance with imperial- 
ism, territorial expansion, struggle against manifestations of class 
awareness of the Jewish working people and the national-libera- 
tion movements in the Middle East. 


References 


1. Irgun Zvai Leumi—a Zionist terrorist organisation founded 
under Jabotinsky’s ideological tutelage and led by Menach- 
em Begin before the establishment of the state of Israel. 


2. V. Jabotinsky, The Jewish State, Tel Aviv, 1967, p. 3 (in 
Russian). 


. Ibid., p. 41. 
. Ibid., p. 39. 
. Ibid., p. 40. 
. Ibid., p. 56. 
. Ibid., p. 44. 
. Middle East International, 18 March, 1983, p. 13. 


. U.N. Special Political Committee. Summary Record of the 
29th Meeting 12.X1.80, A/SPC/35/SR29, p. 14. 


10. V. Jabotinsky, Op. cit., p. 46. 

11. Middle East International, 5 August 1983, p. 13. 
12. V. Jabotinsky, Op. cit., p. 46. 

13. Ibid. 


oOo CON DD NO KS OD 


le 163 


14. Ibid., pp. 47, 49. 

15. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 7, Progress Publishers 
Moscow, 1977, p. 99. ) 

16. V. Jabotinsky, Op. cit., p. 99. 

17. Leila S. Kadi, A Survey of American-Israeli Relations, Pa}. 
estine Research Center, Beirut, 1969, p. 10. 

18. Information Bulletin of the Communist Party of Israel, 
Special Number. Pre-Congress Material for the XVII Con. 
gress of the Communist Party of Israel, Tel Aviv, 1972, 
pp. 26-27. 

19. The Concise Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, p. 487. 

20. V. Jabotinsky, Op. cit., pp. 17-18. 


0. Olgin 


CONTRADICTIONS WITHIN 
INTERNATIONAL ZIONISM: 
MYTH OR REALITY? 


Over the past two decades Zionist ideologues tend to speak 
about the “crisis” of Zionism. From the rostrums of diverse Zion- 
ist “conferences” and “forums” one continuously hears hysterical 
lamentations over the fact that Zionism is being “forced into the 
background”, that it is “incapable of accomplishing the tasks 
facing the Jewish people”. This campaign is being artfully for- 
mented by the Zionist press and the Western mass media which 
is under the control of the Zionists. 

Crisis phenomena can in fact be observed in Zionism, but they 
are related, above all, to the crisis of the entire capitalist system, 
and also to the obvious viciousness and unscientific nature of 
the entire “theoretical” heritage of this reactionary ideology. As 
an ideology and political practice of the Jewish big bourgeoisie, 
Zionism 1s, above all, a class phenomenon, and hence its poten- 
tial opportunities and development roads are directly linked 
with the opportunities and development of the entire imperialist 
system. 

The tendency to parade the “crisis of Zionism” pursues the 
aim, above all, of distracting the world public’s attention from 
the reactionary essence of this phenomenon, to create the impres- 
sion that as such Zionism, weakened by its internal contradic- 
tions, is no longer dangerous and there is no need to fight against 
it. On the other hand, this tendency is designed to make the 
public associate the very concept of “Zionism” primarily with 
the state of Israel, or with Jews in general. This state of affairs 
is extremely favourable to Zionist propaganda, for it provides 
“srounds” for accusing the whole world of anti-Semitism, so as 
to give greater credibility to a basic postulate of Zionist “theory” 
on the “perpetual and ineradicable nature of anti-Semitism”. 


165 


This aim is served also by the broadly trumpeted difference, 
within international Zionism, as, for example, the differences oy 
the question of the fate of the occupied Arab lands. Whereas the 
Likud bloc government in Israel] is pursuing a course towards 
the annexation of these territories, the majority of Jewish organi. 
sations of the Diaspora come out against it in words, basing 
their stand on the assumption that the “absorption” by Israel of 
over a million Palestinian Arabs would damage its “Jewish na. 
ture”: in effect, however, they express the viewpoint of their 
countries’ ruling circles, who want a more flexible Israel. How. 
ever, the calls of the opposition Israeli Labour Party for a “ter. 
ritorial compromise with Jordan” and putting a stop to the 
construction of Jewish settlements in seized territories heavily 
populated by Arabs are purely a short-term expediency and are 
explained, above all, by the fight for power. Should this party 
come to power no fundamental changes in Israeli policy can be 
expected, including that with respect to the West Bank of the 
Jordan and the Gaza Strip. Thus these differences are largely 
artificial and are not fundamental in character. 

Ever since the creation of the “Jewish state” the Zionist lead- 
ers of Israel have attempted to orientate the entire system of 
Zionism as a whole on unconditional and complete service in 
the interests of this state. With this aim in view a campaign 
was launched for brainwashing the Jews of the Diaspora and, 
in particular, the American Jews, which is designed to subordi- 
nate their activity to the organisation of all-round aid to Israel, 
including directly influencing the US administration to this end. 
However, such designs continue to arouse oppostion on the part 
of the American Jewish establishment. This is essentially a mat- 
ter of rivalry between two groups of the nationalistic Jewish 
bourgeoisie—Israeli and American; moreover, the latter is un- 
willing to recognise the Israeli Zionists’ leadership of interna- 
tional Zionism. This rivalry is a reflection of the contradictions 
peculiar in general to relations between the bourgeois classes 
of different countries. The Jewish establishment of the Diaspora, 
and above all of the USA, having failed to maintain its super- 
jority, has taken a course towards the establishment of “equal 
co-operation” between Israel and the Diaspora, while simul- 
taneously upholding its right to criticise certain aspects of the 
home and foreign policy of Israel, and also to take part in the 


166 


elaboration of the political course of the “Jewish state”. More- 
over, seeing the inability of the Israeli leadership to solve many 
foreign and home problems, the Jewish big bourgeoisie of the 
West, above all of the USA, which participates in subsidising 
the Israeli economy and renders financial aid to Israel, is increas- 
ingly beginning to demand participation in determining the ways 
of the Israeli economy’s development, and also the general char- 
acter of use of the financial means coming from outside. All 
this, naturally, engenders countermeasures on the part of the 
Zionist leadership of Israel. Things have come to such a pass 
that Israeli Zionists have begun saying that at the present stage 
there exist “two Zionisms’—“a poor man’s Zionism” and a “rich 
man’s Zionism”. The Israeli Jerusalem Post wrote: 

“They believe their money should talk and that it should say 
exactly what they want it to say. They intend to take control 
of the Zionist apparatus in the Diaspora and in Israel as well, 
and to decide the roles everyone will play. 

“What is envisaged, therefore, whether the Bronfmans, the 
Tishers and the Chinns realise it or not, is a rich man’s Zion- 
ism and a poor man’s Zionism. The rich will have second homes 
in Israel, possibly send some of their children to be educated 
here—the partial aliya of Haim Ben-Shachar of Tel Aviv Univer- 
sity--and will control the Zionist organizations in the Diaspora 
and the World Zionist Organization in Jerusalem. They will be 
powerful and important as never before. 

“.. What we are witnessing is a determined attempt to 1m- 
port the morality of the businessman into Zionism—rationaliza- 
tion, efficiency, cost-effectiveness.’’* 

Thus when it comes to money, incomes and profits, the “single 
Jewish people” and “class peace among the world Jewry” are im- 
mediately forgotten, and the psychology of a businessman gains 
the upper hand. And it is no accident that the same Jerusalem 
Post wrote during the 30th Congress of the World Zionist Orga- 
nization: “It [Zionist movement] has become a sapless shell, 
held erect not by a vision, but by distribution of privileges, echo- 
ing not with values, but empty rhetoric.”? The “organised Zion- 
ist movement” has in fact turned into a source of profit, a sinecure 
for the select among the “Jewish people”. 

The fact that many, if not most differences within interna- 
tional Zionism, and also between the various trends of Jewish 


167 


bourgeois nationalism are determined by the differing interests 
of Israel and the Diaspora, tends to make the Zionist thesis on 
the existence of an “extraterritorial world Jewish nation” sti} 
less convincing. Rejecting this thesis, Professor Harold Fisch 
of Bar-Ilan University stated: “Israe] and Diaspora are no longer 
the same people. We are bound by kinship and memories 
but we are moving in different historical directions.”* 

Today, when US imperialism has turned Israel into an out- 
post of “Western values” in the Middle East, making it “the 
most reliable, most democratic and irreplaceable ally” in this 
region, the Jewish big bourgeoisie of the USA, recalling that it 
belongs to the “Jewish people”, is attempting, and not unsuccess- 
fully, to use all the advantages of the existing situation. Israel 
for it is above all a tool for strengthening its own political and eco- 
nomic positions and influence. That is why the Jewish big bour- 
geoisie is doing everything possible so that Israel would in fu- 
ture too be a “strategic asset” to the USA. 

To speak of a “poor man’s Zionism” and a “rich man’s Zion- 
ism” is mere demagogy. Zionism has always been, is and will 
remain in the service of the most reactionary imperialist cir- 
cles. The majority of working Jews, however, are either indif- 
ferent to Zionism or, in one or another form, come out 
against it. 

In this connection we deem it essential to deal briefly with 
such a fundamental provision of Zionist “theory” as the thesis 
on the “perpetual nature of anti-Semitism”, which is actively 
being used by Zionist propaganda to develop so-called “Jewish 
self-awareness”, a feeling of isolation, of a hostile environment, 
which, according to Zionist designs, should serve as an instiga- 
tion for Jews to adopt Zionist ideology. 

The “father” of Zionism, Theodor Herzl, wrote in 1899 in 
one of his articles that he himself was brought to Zionism “. . .by 
the new enemy which attacked us just when we were in the pro- 
cess of complete assimilation: by anti-Semitism. I am still aware 
what an impression it made upon me when JI, in the year 1882, 
read Diihring’s book on the Jewish question (Die Judenfrage als 
Rassen-Sitten—und Kulturfrage), a book which is as full of 
hate as it is brilliant. I think that prior to it I really no longer 
knew that I was a Jew. Dithring’s book had an effect on me 
as if I had received a blow on the head. And that same thing 


168 


probably happened to many a Western Jew who had already 
forgotten his peoplehood. The anti-Semites awakened it. . .”* The 
Zionists readily seized upon and actively used this “idea” of 
Herzl’s. From their viewpoint anti-Semitism is called upon to fa- 
cjlitate the development of “Jewish self-awareness” among the 
Diaspora Jews, to hold back the process of assimilation, and in- 
crease the “attraction to Zion” and thereby stimulate aliyahs. To 
achieve these goals the Zionists are prepared to undertake any 
adventure and even crime, totally disregarding the sad conse- 
uences of their actions for the “Jewish people’. 

Still another illustration of the hypocrisy of the Zionist lead- 
ers and also some outstanding spokesmen of the US Jewish es- 
tablishment are their active contacts and striving to “strength- 
en co-operation” with the Moral Majority, an implicitly anti- 
Semitic movement headed by the ultra-reactionary Jerry Fall- 
well. In the Israeli leaders’ view, the Moral Majority’s attitude 
to Jews is not the most important thing, what is important 1s 
their attitude to Zionism and Israel. 

The decoration by Menachem Begin, then Prime Minister of 
Israel, of Moral Majority leader Fallwell with the Zeev Jabotins- 
ky medal in 1980 became the apotheosis of hypocrisy and cynic- 
ism of the Israeli Zionist leaders. This action aroused the in- 
dignation of the US Jewish community. Although the policy of 
the Zionists’ rapprochement with the Moral Majority does not 
meet with a sufficient rebuff on the part of the leaders of US 
Jewish organisations, still some of them have expressed their 
dissatisfaction with the course of the Israeli leadership. Here, 
for example, is what Rita Hauser, one of the leaders of the Amer- 
ican Jewish Committee, said: “There is also the perception that 
Begin speaks on behalf of the world Jewish community. Well, I 
did not elect him and he certainly does not speak on my behalf 
on many issues... I don’t have any doubt that Begin’s embrace 
of Jerry Fallwell alienated the majority of American Jews, who 
regard Fallwell and his group as a major threat to their political 
position in this country.” 

Israel’s drawing together with the American ultras is a fully 
natural development and is directly linked with the growing ag- 
gressiveness of US imperialism and, in consequence, the grow- 
ing aggressiveness of the “Jewish state”. However, this conver- 
gence apparently has an ulterior motive. The fact of the mat- 


169 


ter is that both the Israeli ruling circles and the US ultras are 
objectively interested in fanning anti-Semitism. 

Owing to their anti-Jewish prejudices, of which Professo, 
Yehuda Bauer spoke at the 30th Congress of the WZO, the 
anti-Semites in the USA seek to drive out the Jews from that 
country. The Jerusalem Post wrote: “He [Bauer] also warned 
that the American Protestant fundamentalists, while pro-Israe) 
because they want the Jews to return to Zion in fulfilment of 
biblical prophesy, don’t want the Jews in America. “They won’t 
banish the Jews,—but the intent of their beliefs is clear’.’® 

The Israeli Zionists have a stake in fanning anti-Semitism to 
step up the stream of immigration to the “Promised Land”. 

However, there is still another force among the “world Jewry” 
that is interested in fanning anti-Semitism—the big bourgeoisie 
of Jewish extraction. From the viewpoint of this bourgeoisie, 
which is, undoubtedly, intent on strengthening Israel, anti-Semit- 
ism, apart from everything else, inevitably drives the Jews to- 
wards isolation from their environment and facilitates the cultiva- 
tion of a feeling of isolation and alienation in this environment, 
thereby substantially easing the task of preaching a “class peace” 
among the Jews. 

Thus it becomes clear why anti-Semitism, a phenomenon 
peculiar to exploitative societies, is not only not dying down 
in the West but, not infrequently, acquires the most odious 
forms. 

We shall deal briefly with yet another thesis of Zionist “theo- 
ry”’—about “the Jews’ age-old attraction to Zion”. In this con- 
nection it is appropriate to cite the words of Naftali Feder, a 
member of the Knesset from the United Workers’ Party of Israel 
(Mapam), spoken back in 1978 on the eve of the opening of 
the 29th World Congress of the WZO, but which are fully ap- 
plicable to the present: “The tragedy of the Zionist movement, 
a movement that inspired hundreds of thousands of Jews to 
knock on locked gates, is that now, when the gates are open, no 
one is knocking.’”” 

The fact alone that Herzl set forth in his time the idea of 
solving the “Jewish problem” by converting all the Jews to 
Christianity, and later called for the creation of a “Jewish 
hearth” in Uganda, reveals the artificiality of the thesis on the 
“attraction of Jews to Zion”. The Israeli writer and journalist 


170 


Boas Evron wrote in this regard that “the Zionist ‘solution’ has 
roved to be faulty on several counts. 

“First a majority of the Jewish people did not wish to emigrate 
from North and South America to the Jewish Homeland, thus 
casting doubts on the idea of a dispersed nation with an age-old 
yearning for a homeland. ... Indeed, most Jews leave their coun- 
tries only under pressure, and Israel is one of their last chances 
for a destination. The continuing Diaspora is thus a matter of 

reference, not of necessity. 

“Second, the promise of Israel as a ‘haven for the Jewish 
people’ has been proved false. Apart from occasional outbreaks 
of anti-Semitism elsewhere in the world, Israel is the only coun- 
try where being a Jew is dangerous, and it is the only Jewish com- 
munity in the world that calls on other Jews to save it from 
‘another Holocaust’, a threat its founding was supposed to 
avert.... 

“The greatest paradox relates directly to Israel’s lack of a 
cultural identity. No genuine Jewish national culture has yet de- 
veloped in Israel.’”* 

The implicit artificiality of the thesis of an “age-old attrac- 
tion of Jews to Zion” is reflected in the different positions taken 
by the Jewish establishment of the Diaspora and of Israel on the 
question of Jewish emigration. 

Attracting the Diaspora Jews to the “Promised Land” has 
been and remains one of the basic directions of the activity of in- 
ternational Zionism and the state of Israel. However, the deplor- 
able situation in this sphere and the growing outflow of Jews 
from Israel* alarm the Zionist leadership, forcing it to seek 
new and more refined methods of influencing the Diaspora Jews 
with the aim of inducing them to go to Israel. Becoming convinced 
that the emigration of Jews from the USA, Canada, Latin 
America and the West European countries is very insignificant 
and cannot satisfy Israel’s demographic requirements, the Zion- 
ists have since the late 1960s concentrated their efforts on organ- 
ising the emigration of Soviet citizens of Jewish nationality, 
which, undoubtedly, corresponds also to the designs of US im- 
perialism, which is interested in the emigration of Jews from the 


* According to data of the World Jewish Congress, as of January 
1981, 500,000 Israeli citizens lived abroad, primarily in the USA.—V. O. 


171 


USSR above all with the aim of subverting the unity of the mul- 
tinational Soviet society, provoking a “brain drain’, etc. 

However, it is on this issue that Israel comes into the sharpest 
conflict with its overseas “brothers”. This is one of the most 
sensitive questions of the “Zionist movement”, which has be- 
come particularly acute since the formation of the state of Israel: 
the question of the “legitimacy” of the existence of the Diaspora 
and the obligatory nature of aliyah. The Israeli Zionist leadership 
and the World Zionist Organisation under its control insist that 
“life in the Diaspora is life in banishment” and that aliyah is 
obligatory. However, after a fierce struggle, the Diaspora Zionists 
and, above all, those of the USA, who come under the influence 
of “non-Zionist” circles and rely on the support of the US Jewish 
establishment, were able at the 29th Congress of the WZO 
(Jerusalem 1978) to achieve the adoption of a resolution stating 
that continuation of Jewish life in the Diaspora is a reality. Thus 
the Zionist spokesmen of the Diaspora, primarily those of the 
USA, achieved a kind of official indulgence for all who do not 
wish to emigrate to Israel. However, debates on the issue of the 
obligatory nature of aliyah are still going on today, as mirrored by 
the work of the 30th WZO Congress. At this congress two defini- 
tions of a Zionist were given. “A Zionist is a Jew who comes on 
aliyah or who is preparing to settle in Israel, Jews who merely 
donate money or offer political support are pro-Israel or pro- 
Zionist.’®> Another, more vague definition was given by Arieh 
Dultzin, Chairman of the WZO Executive: “A Zionist is a Jew 
anywhere who wants and believes in and works for the majority 
of the Jewish people to live in Israel.”?° Thus what we have 
here is an attempt by Dultzin—who is perfectly well informed that 
the 1.4 million Jews who are officially registered as members of 
Zionist organisations (a clearly overstated figure—-V.O.) do 
not want to go to Israel—to somehow reconcile the Zionist 
“theory” with existing realities. 

Recognising thereby the fact that the overwhelming majority 
of Jews in the West do not want to emigrate to Israel, the Zion- 
ists deliberately close their eyes to the fact that the same thing 
is happening in the Soviet Union, that is, Soviet Jews, who are 
full-fledged and equal citizens of their country, do no wish 
to leave their homeland. However, since here the interests of 
the Zionists fully correspond to those of US imperialism, the Zion- 


172 


ists, under the smokescreen of assertions about the “oppressed 
situation of Soviet Jews’, have launched a fierce campaign for 
emigration trom the USSR. Fully manifested here is the hypoc- 
risy and cynicism of the Zionist “champions of the rights of 
Soviet Jews’. 

It should be noted that from the outset a large number of 
Jews who emigrated from the USSR with Israeli visas refused 
to go to Israel, preferring to settle down in third countries and, 
primarily, in the USA. The number of such persons in recent 
years has reached 70 to 80 per cent of the overall number of 
Jews leaving the USSR. 

Dissatisfied with such a state of affairs, the Israeli Government 
through the Jewish Agency and its embassy in Washington de- 
manded that the US administration forbid entrance to the Unit- 
ed States to Jews who have no close relatives there. Moreover, 
it demanded of the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society not to ren- 
der material aid to such individuals. However, in both cases the 
Israeli Zionists received a negative reply. The US Government 
has preserved refugee status for Jews leaving the USSR and 
continues to provide funds every year for their settling in the 
USA. More, on this issue the administration was upheld by the 
Jewish establishment of the USA. 

Three basic conclusions can apparently be drawn from the 
above. First, US imperialism puts its global interests above the 
interests of its Middle Eastern ally. Realising that refusal to ac- 
cept “refugees” would inevitably lead to a reduction of the num- 
ber of people wanting to leave the Soviet Union, the USA is 
seeking first of all to use the Jewish emigration to subvert the 
unity of the multinational Soviet society. Second, the Jewish 
big bourgeoisie, which has become closely intertwined with US 
monopoly capital, fully shares the interests of its American 
“class brothers” and is inclined to forget about its belonging to 
the “world Jewish nation” and about the “national hearth” in 
Israel. Finally, it is also obvious that the Israeli Zionists are not 
in the least concerned about the “Jewish people”, nor their con- 
dition. Pursuing their adventuristic aims, they are out to get an 
additional portion of cannon fodder in order to be able to con- 
tinue their expansionist policy. Shlomo Cohen, a teacher at New 
York University, wrote on this score: “The Israeli position on the 
question of noshrim (dropouts) is illustrative. According to most 


173 


Israelis, Soviet Jews who choose to settle in the Diaspora should 
not be aided. A poignant indication of the distorted, egoistic prism 
which Israeli Zionism has adopted: Aliya or dump them,”1 

Thus the Zionist leaders’ assertions to the effect that “Zionist 
ideology” is not subject to crises, that it is only “Zionist practice” 
that is experiencing a crisis is pure demagogy. The contradictions 
within international Zionism are to be found above all in Zionist 
ideology, in the non-scientific and reactionary essence of its two 
basic postulates—on the existence of a “world Jewish nation” 
and on the “perpetual nature of anti-Semitism”. At the same time 
there are no contradictions in Zionist “practice”, the main con- 
tent of which is struggle against the national liberation and rev. 
olutionary movements, rabid anti-communism and _ anti-Soviet- 
ism, nor can there be any, for it meets the interests of imperial- 
ism, of which international Zionism is a detachment. It is only 
a matter of tactical difference on some practical issues. While 
the Israeli Zionists insist on Jews emigrating only to Israel, the 
so-called “cultural-national autonomy” for Jews in the USSR, 
which might facilitate the development among them of bour- 
geois-nationalistic, religious, pro-Israeli, pro-Zionist, Zionist ten- 
dencies, etc., would fully suit the spokesmen of “nationalism in 
the Diaspora”. 

Finally, it is also worth mentioning both the Zionists’ and 
the US administration’s periodical displays of a “crisis” in rela- 
tions between the USA and Israel. Here is what, for example, 
The Christian Science Monitor wrote in February 1982, that 1s, 
two months after Israel’s actual annexation of the Syrian Golan 
Heights, which aroused the demonstrative “indignation” of the 
US administration: “Today the two nations appear to be on the 
outs as never before despite the fact that a highly conservative, 
anti-Soviet president is in Washington and a highly conservative, 
anti-Soviet prime minister is in Jerusalem.””? 

Correctly stressing what Reagan had in common with Beg- 
in, the paper, I believe, over-dramatised their “disagreement”. 
The periodical lament about a “crisis”, about sharpening con- 
tradictions between the USA and Israel is nothing but an artful- 
ly enacted scene that is intended to disguise the fact that these 
two extremely aggressive states have common interests. For the 
US administration it is above all an attempt to dissociate itself 
from the most odious acts of the Israeli expansionists, to justify 


174 


‘self in the eyes of the public, and also a concession to the 
“moderates’, 1.e. Conservative Arab regimes. For the Zionists it 
i; an opportunity to demonstrate their “sovereignty”, to show 
their alleged complete “independence” from US imperialism. 

But today, as in the past, the “family quarrels” of Washington 
and Tel Aviv are merely propaganda farces. “Complete har- 
mony” of interests of the USA and Israel, the anti-Soviet thrust 
of their foreign policies, the use of continued occupation of Arab 
territories to reach a settlement on the US-Israeli conditions— 
all this is characteristic also of the present development stage 
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. And all this was clearly manifested 
during the Israeli incursion into Lebanon in the summer of 
1982. Analysing the advantages for the USA of the situation 
created by Israel, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger 
wrote that the war in Lebanon “opens up extraordinary oppor- 
tunities for a dynamic American diplomacy through the Middle 
East.... And events in Lebanon should enable us to overcome 
the existing fragmentation of our policy and to relate in a 
comprehensive approach the three great issues of the Middle 
East: the Lebanon crisis, the autonomy talks regarding the West 
Bank and Gaza and the threat to Western interests in the Per- 
sian Gulf.... Lebanon can be another testing ground for prov- 
ing that radical Arab regimes and Soviet backing offer no solu- 
tion to any of the central issues of concern in the area.”!® 

It should be noted that President Reagan attempted to use 
the Lebanese crisis to “galvanise” the Camp David process. Hav- 
ing imposed on Lebanon a “peaceful settlement” with Israel, the 
Americans took one more step along the road of implementing 
the policy of separate deals, which in reality cannot lead to 
anything but a new aggravation of the Middle East situation. 
This is borne out by the recent events in Lebanon, where the 
American “peacemakers” shed the blood of thousands of inno- 
cent victims. 

Anti-Sovietism is a predominant feature of the foreign policy 
of both US imperialism and international Zionism. The com- 
mon goals of the USA and international Zionism may be for- 
mulated as follows: not to permit the USSR’s participation in 
any way in the settlement of the Middle East conflict; subver- 
sion of the positions of socialism and above all in the Soviet 
Union; fanning of tension in every possible way. The American 


175 


journalist Christopher Hitchens wrote on this score: “Today 
when Israel puts itself forward at a sturdy ally in the cold wa; 
... there has been a certain—how shall we say—coarsening of 
the Zionist position. Israel has become the natural friend of the 
overdogs in America and elsewhere... .’’** 

What especially infuriates the Zionists is that in the Soviet 
Union national discrimination and oppression have been elim. 
inated for all time, and all preconditions for anti-Semitism 
have been eradicated. Contrary to the Zionists’ assertions to the 
effect that “struggle for the Soviet Jews” bears an allegedly “na- 
tional” character, this struggle is above all an expression of class 
enmity of the bourgeoisie of Jewish extraction with respect to 
the first country of victorious socialism. And in this enmity the 
Zionists are increasingly converging with international imperial. 
ism and world reaction. 


References 


1. Jerusalem Post, February 13, 1981, p. 6. 
2. Ibid., December 8, 1982, p. 8. 


. Quoted in: The Jerusalem Post. 30th Zionist Congress Sup- 
plement, November 16, 1982, p. XXV. 


. Quoted in: Midstream, November 1982, p. 13. 


©o 


4 

5. Jerusalem Post, April 25, 1983, p. 9. 
6. Ibid., December 15, 1982, p. 2. 

7. Ibid., December 12, 1982, p. 8. 

8 


. The Nation, December 5, 1981, No. 19, Vol. 233, pp. 597- 
598. 


9. Quoted in: The Guardian, December 16, 1982, p. 6. 
10. Ibid. 


11. Jerusalem Post, December 9, 1982, p. 8. 

12. The Christian Science Monitor, February 23, 1982, p. 3. 
13. Los Angeles Times, June 18, 1982, p. 7. 

14. The Nation, December 5, 1981, No. 19, Vol. 233, p. 609. 


I. Zvyagelskaya 


THE ROLE OF THE ARMY AND 
THE MILITARY IN 

THE FORMATION OF 

THE BELLICOSE IDEAS 

OF ZIONISM IN THE STATE 
OF ISRAEL 


One of the most important questions connected with the problem 
of taking and implementing political decisions in Israel is that 
of the role of the military in determining the main directions and 
content of the country’s domestic and foreign policy. The armed 
forces, which are at the service of the ruling classes, perform 
political functions, anyway. However, if the army begins to take 
part in the running of the state—and just such a situation has 
taken shape in Israel,—the distribution of functions within the 
state system of power is shifted, and the army acquires definite 
political autonomy. We are not talking about the opposition of 
the military to the civilian authorities—the Zionist leaders of 
Israel all stand on a single extremist platform—but about an at- 
tempt to show what “contribution” the Israeli army has made, 
and continues to make, to the realisation and development of 
Zionist conceptions. 

The process of establishing the Israeli armed forces was char- 
acterised by a number of features which, in the end, caused the 
peculiar position of the military in this “garrison state’. First, the 
army, whose backbone had already taken shape before the state 
of Israel existed, was formed as a direct result of the confronta- 
tion with the Arab national liberation movement. 

Secondly, Zionist armed detachments had been the most im- 
portant part of the Jewish community’s political system, and 
Israel in fact inherited the existing structure with a large mili- 
tary element. 

Thirdly, by maintaining permanent military tension in the re- 
gion, Israel’s ruling bosses not only guaranteed the military 
firm influence over the course of state affairs, but were also 
unable to manage without it. 

Fourthly, the fact that Israel succeeded in creating a military machine which the country could not afford economically, js 
explained above all by the position it was and continues to be 
assigned in the realisation of the strategic plans of the imperial. 
ist powers, in particular of the United States. Although the in. 
terests of the USA in the Middle East are greater than those 
of Israel, the general direction of Israel’s foreign policy undoubt. 
edly corresponds to the goals of the United States, which has de. 
clared this country its “strategic ally”. For this reason the main 
way of creating and maintaining Israel’s military machine be- 
came a constant flow of foreign military and economic aid, 80 
per cent of which came from the USA.? 

The prerequisites for the active participation of the military 
in political life and in the realisation of Zionist doctrines had al- 
ready arisen during the Zionist colonisation of Palestine. This co- 
lonisation was aimed at creating a single-nationality state, which 
presupposed territorial expansion and the ousting of the local 
Arab population, and was accompanied by wide use of violent 
methods. 

The Zionist intrusion into Palestine in actual fact began at 
the turn of the century, when the World Zionist Organisation 
(WZO) declared its aim as being to create a Jewish state. The 
Zionists, who represented the interests of the Jewish bourgeoisie, 
tried to tear Jewish working people away from the international 
struggle of the masses against the evil inherent in the capitalist 
system by playing on nationalist sentiments. They also tried to 
put obstacles in the way of assimilation tendencies amongst the 
Jewish population, and to provide better conditions for the 
business activity of their patrons. 

The Zionist leaders, who had formulated their ideas as being 
“to settle the people without a country in the country without 
a people”, simply ignored the fact that Palestine represented an 
original Arab country with its own culture and history. In 1919 
it had an Arab population of 642,000, while the Jewish popula- 
tion was just 58,000.2 Thus, to attain their aim the Zionists re- 
sorted to encroaching upon the rights of the local Arab popula- 
tion, which, by the very fact of its existence, hindered the rea- 
lisation of their plans. 

The Zionists succeeded in enlisting the support of Great Britain, 
which had gained access to Palestine after the First World War. 
Palestine had previously been part of the Ottoman Empire. 


178 


Links between the British Government and the WZO were for- 
mulated in the Balfour Declaration (November 2, 1917). Having 
supported the Zionists’ demands for a Jewish “national home” to 
be created in Palestine, Great Britain was guided by its own im- 
perial interests and hoped in this way to strengthen its control 
in this region, using the “Heimstatte” (national home) as a “‘buf- 
fer” protecting the approaches to the Suez Canal and British 
communications. As for the leaders of the WZO, their plans in 
respect of Palestine went much further. However, because of 
the prevailing situation they sometimes preferred not to adver- 
tise their intentions, which boiled down to the transformation of 
Palestine, and, possibly, of the territory of bordering Arab. coun- 
tries, into a Jewish state. Max Nordau, a prominent Zionist figure, 
remembered: “I did my best to persuade the claimants of the 
Jewish state in Palestine that we might find a circumlocution 
that would express all we meant... I suggested ‘Heimstatte’ as 
a synonym for ‘State’... This is the history of the much comment- 
ed expression. It was equivocal, but we all understood what it 
meant. To us it signified ‘Yudenstaat’ then and it signifies the 
same now.’* 

In April 1920, Great Britain obtained a Mandate over Palestine 
from the League of Nations, and in July of the same year Her- 
bert Samuel was appointed High Commissioner of Palestine, on 
whom the Zionists placed great hope. Chaim Weizmann, the 
chairman of the WZO, wrote: “Sir Herbert Samuel is our friend. 
At our request he accepted that difficult position. We put him 
in that position. He is our Samuel.”’* 

The Zionist leaders were banking on mass Jewish immigration 
and on providing these immigrants with land. Seizing land from 
the Palestinian Arabs and sharply reducing their number, the 
Zionists took a series of military, political, and economic mea- 
sures, in which an ever greater role was assigned to military 
pressure. Intensified immigration in itself brought about a 
change in the demographic situation in Palestine. For example, 
in the space of one decade (1920-1930), around 100,000 Jewish 
immigrants came to Palestine. The policy of ousting the local 
Arab population led to an even greater change in the demogra- 
phic situation. Literally from the first years of British rule, the 
Zionists began to follow a policy which presupposed not only 
buying up plots of land from Palestinian feudal lords, many of 


127 179 


whom lived in neighbouring Arab countries, but also the partia] 
expropriation of small Arab property owners. In 1920 the Jewish 
community had 65,000 hectares at its disposal, whereas in 1945 
the overall area of land owned by the Zionists was around 
160,000 hectares.® 

However, even this rate did not suit the Zionist bosses and 
military force was called on to quicken it. Making use of the cov. 
er of the policy of colonisation, Zionist military detachments 
began to play an ever wider role in broadening the scales of this 
policy, driving Arab tenants from lands acquired by Zionist funds 
and establishing settlements in the heart of populated Arab ter- 
ritories. These settlements, which were built according to the 
principle “wall and tower” marked a kind of “military frontier” of 
areas which had come’ under the Zionists’ control—frontiers 
which were expanding more and more. 

The Zionist military organisations included Haganah—an ir- 
regular military formation which was subordinate to the leader- 
ship of the Jewish community and the Jewish Agency, in which 
the Mapai Party had held a leading position in the 1930s; the 
Irgun Zvai Leumi and Lehi terrorist organisations, which were 
military offshoots of ultra-Zionist parties and groups; and the 
professional Palmach sub-units which had appeared during the 
Second World War and were affiliated to the kibbutz movement. 
Military organisations thus became a part of the political struc- 
ture of the Jewish community. Here it is important to stress that 
all the main Zionist groupings, from the so-called “socialist” ones 
to those on the ultra-right, and irrespective of the tactics they used 
to achieve Zionist goals in Palestine, relied on armed detachments 
and considered military force an important element in the fight 
for the “Biblical land”. This irrefutable fact disproves the Zion- 
ists’ fabrications about “humane colonisation” and the role of 
“peaceful labour in the rebirth of Palestine”. The close links 
between military organisations and the political institutions of 
the Jewish community laid the foundations of the military com- 
mand’s political activity. Even before Israel existed as a state the 
military command had been drawn into the decision-making 
process, and it kept this role for itself afterwards. 

This conclusion does not only relate to Haganah, whose mili- 
tary command, which was connected with Mapai, in fact formed 
part of the ruling elite, but also to other military formations. 


180 


For example, after Menachem Begin had taken the Irgun Zvai 
Leumi leadership in 1944, this grouping, which had taken its 
lead from the Revisionist Party, began to play a more indepen- 
dent political role, and in 1948 the extremely nationalistic Herut 
Party was founded on its basis and formed the opposition to the 
Mapai Party. 

Palmach, which was founded in 1941, was to a significant ex- 
tent placed under the control of the kibbutz movement, which 
was associated with the right wing of the Mapai Party. In 1954 
a significant number of its soldiers and commanders joined the 
newly-founded Ahdut Haavoda Party. 

Operating as an instrument for realising Zionist ideas in Pa- 
lestine, military detachments were called on to suppress the grow- 
ing dissatisfaction of the Palestinian Arabs who were being de- 
prived of their land and even of the possibility of finding work 
with Jewish settlers, being ousted from industry and trade and, 
in the end, forced to leave their homeland, all as a result of the 
policy of colonisation being carried out on a nationalistic basis. 
The confrontation with the Arab national liberation movement 
was one of the most important factors predetermining both Zion- 
ist military groupings and some peculiarities of their organisa- 
tional formation. 

From the moment the British mandatory administration was 
established until the Second World War, the Arab national liber- 
ation movement in Palestine went through two stages in its de- 
velopment. The first stage (in the 1920s) was characterised, 
above all, by an anti-Zionist direction. At that time anti-colonial 
trends were not sufficiently developed in the movement. Accord- 
ing to the Soviet researcher V. Nosenko, “the reasons for this 
were rooted, on the one hand, in the flexibility of the British 
colonial policy in Palestine and, on the other, in the tendency 
of the Arab feudal lords, who headed the movement, to compro- 
mise, as well as in the inertness which had been still dominant 
amongst the masses.””? 

The. British colonial administration, while undoubtedly, sup- 
porting the Zionists, was trying to “placate” the Arabs at the same 
time, demonstrating its “impartiality”. It was with this aim that 
politicians time and again stressed Britain’s intention “to safe- 
guard the political interests of the Arab population of Pales- 
tine’”’.® Not wishing to strain relations with the Arab feudal lords, who 
had mainly directed the Palestinian Arab movement into a na. 
tionalistic course, the British authorities preferred not to associate 
openly with Haganah in the 1920s, which was suppressing the 
Arab population and often provoking it to demonstrate. At this 
time Haganah had separate armed detachments which operated 
illegally and did not enjoy the direct support of the British ad. 
ministration. 

The position began to change at the end of the 1920s. In 1929, 
the largest Arab uprising yet seen flared up, catching the British 
by surprise with its scale and its emerging anti-colonial slogans. 
From this moment on, Haganah units began to receive British 
weapons. 

At the beginning of the 1930s the national liberation move. 
ment of the Arab masses in Palestine entered a new stage, tak- 
ing on an ever clearer anti-colonial direction and class nature, 
The British henceforth banked on Zionist military groupings, 
trying to put down demonstrations by the broad Arab masses 
with their help. In the middle of the 1930s, the British colonial 
authorities, who had become interested in reinforcing Haganah, 
began to render assistance to this organisation in the prepara- 
tion of cadres, as well as in the development of stategy and tac- 
tics. The essence of the Zionist alliance with Great Britain showed 
itself particularly clearly during the Arab uprising of 1936- 
1939, which was aimed against the expansionist course of the 
Zionist leaders and the colonialist policy of Great Britain. The 
British actively used Zionist military units against the uprisers. 
“Thousands of young Palestinian Jews were armed by the British 
and organised in territorial units to help keep order, thus becom- 
ing the nucleus of official Jew Army, side by side with the 
clandestine Haganah forces.’ 

Direct military cooperation between Britain and the Zionists 
did not continue for long. Surprised by the scale of the Arabs’ 
national liberation struggle, the British Government, trying to 
maintain its presence in Palestine, resorted to a number of mea- 
sures which limited Zionist colonisation in this region. From this 
time, the Zionist bosses assigned yet another function to their 
armed detachments—they began to play an active role in en- 
suring illegal Jewish immigration. 

Later on the crisis in relations between the Zionists and the 


182 


British administration deepened considerably, even though the 
main task of the Zionist leadership during the period of military 
clashes between the two remained the fight against the Arab po- 
pulation of Palestine, which ‘‘interfered’ with the realisation of 
the idea of a Zionist state. Intimidation, terror and bombings 
on market places and in Arab sectors became the main methods 
of the Zionists in their efforts to drive out the Palestinian Arabs 
and create a state on as wide a territorial basis as possible. This 
policy reached its climax after the publication of the UN Parti- 
tion Resolution of November 29, 1947. The resolution envisaged 
the discontinuance of the British Mandate over Palestine and the 
creation on its territory of two states—an Arab one, with an 
area Of 11.1 thous. square kilometres, and a Jewish one, with 
an area of 14.1 thous. square kilometres. International status 
was to be established for the Jerusalem zone. Jewish leaders for- 
mally agreed with the UN resolution, but in practice they dreamt 
of a considerably larger Jewish state. 

The evacuation of British forces began in December 1947, and 
was followed by an increase in military activity between the Zion- 
ists and the local armed Arab detachments. The Plan Dalat 
became the Zionists’ main military-strategic plan. It assigned the 
armed forces the task of capturing as much territory as possible 
before the proclamation of a Jewish state, ie. before May 14, 
1948. Although the leadership of the Jewish community verbally 
condemned the extremists’ activity, Haganah and Palmach both 
actively made use of terror. Terror became the most important 
element of the Zionists’ policy concerning the Palestinian Arabs 
and after the creation of Israel was taken up by the Israeli army. 

This was proved, in particular, by the organisational changes 
carried out in the Israeli army at the beginning of the 1950s to 
adapt it to the implementation of punitive and diversionary func- 
tions. We are talking about the creation of the Commandos, 
and in particular of the 101st sub-unit under the command of 
Ariel Sharon. On October 14, 1953, this sub-unit destroyed the 
Arab village of Kibia. 

The state of Israel was proclaimed on May 14, 1948, and on 
May 31, 1948, the creation was officially announced of the Israeli 
army. At this time the first Arab-Israeli war was already under 
way. Many factors had caused it to start, amongst which an im- 
portant place belongs to the Zionists’ policy towards the local 


13¢ 183 


Atab population, and its overt expansionism. Although Israe] 
stubbornly claimed that the 1948-1949 military operations were 
defensive, the country’s leaders tried to use the situation to ey. 
pand the territory of the state as much as possible, and a signif. 
icant part of the proposed Arab state was annexed to Israel. More 
than 900,000 Arab inhabitants of Palestine were forced to leave 
their homeland. “Although the history of the Jewish state 
had scarcely begun,” the Israeli historian M. Bar-Zohar wrote, 
“one thing was clear—neither the frontiers voted by the UN, 
nor those obtained by force of arms in 1948, were the definite 
limits of the State in Ben Gurion’s eyes. A start had been made, 
that was all.’’?° 

Whereas the Zionist leadership, headed by Mapai, had tried at 
times to draw a veil over its true aims during the British Man- 
date, not wishing to strain relations with the British authorities, any 
concealment whatsoever was discarded after the creation of Is- 
rael. The Israeli Government embraced the most extreme ideas 
of Zionism, which envisaged unlimited territorial expansion and 
advocated open racism in respect of the Arabs. The most import- 
ant role in the formulation and realisation of these expansionist 
ideas belonged to military officers. 

The “depolitisation” of the army, which was widely acclaimed 
in Israel, in actual fact signified the aspiration of individual po- 
litical groupings to monopolise the “problem of security” and 
the formation of a kind of “personal club’, whose members were 
the head of the Israeli Government and representatives of the 
military high command. The definite autonomy of the Ministry 
of Defence and of the military command in the structure of the 
Israeli ruling hierarchy was also supported in the beginning by Min- 
ister of Defence, Prime Minister Ben Gurion. He himself in 
fact took all decisions on military and foreign policy questions 
along with his entourage, which included representatives of the 
military command. But even after Ben Gurion finally withdrew, 
the situation did not undergo serious changes. The system of 
mutual relations between the military and the civilian authonities 
in Israel did not take shape under the influence of subjective fac- 
tors—the will of this or that state figure—but reflected the natur- 
al result of the expansionist policy, which had led to the militari- 
sation of the country’s political and economic life. 

Territorial expansion and the fight against progressive Arab 


184 


regimes and movements—these main directions of the Israeli 
course were realised by organising continual military raids into 
Arab territories and large-scale military ventures. In March, 
1949, Israeli armed forces carried out an attack on Southern Ne- 
gev and reached the Gulf of Aqaba, where the port of Elath 
was founded on the site of an Arab village. In March, 1954, the 
Israelis attacked the Jordanian village of Nakhhalin; in August 
1955, the village of Khan Yunis in the Gaza sector; in November 
1955, they invaded the demilitarised zone of Al-Audja, and in 
February 1955, organised a mass raid into Gaza. 

These operations constituted the implementation of the Is- 
raeli military-political doctrine of “uninterrupted action”, ac- 
cording to which military action became the main content of 
Israeli-Arab relations, even if there was some domestic policy 
change unfavourable to Israel in a neighbouring Arab country. 
This military doctrine aimed at forcing the Arabs to submit to 
Israeli diktat was, in its turn, based on extremist political ideas 
such as the “theory of the Arab encirclement”. Even Nahum 
Goldmann, the former chairman of the WJC, noted the decisive 
role of military force in the Israeli policy: “The Israeli policy, 
conceived, determined and dominated by Ben Gurion while he 
was Prime Minister and continued by his successors. . . consisted 
in convicting the Arabs by a permanent demonstration of force 
that they should accept the existence of a Jewish state in their 
midst. The main elements of the Israeli policy—reprisals, coun- 
terattacks against the fedayeen, obstinacy—were based on the 
tactic of impressing on the Arabs by force that they should lo- 
wer their flag.’’** 

The fact that responsibility for implementing the official Israe- 
li foreign policy line was laid on the army secured and fortified 
the significant role of the high command in realising a wider 
set of foreign policy questions, which included both regional 
and international policy, particularly the forming and strengthen- 
ing of coalition links with imperialist powers. The military estab- 
lishment has directly taken part in the decision-making process 
in Israel throughout the country’s history, but its pressure in fa- 
vour of toughening up Israel’s policy as much as possible mani- 
fested itself most clearly on the eve of and during the escalation 
of the Arab-Israeli conflict to crisis stages. 

Thus, before the Tripartite aggression of 1956, the high com- 


185 


mand, drawing on the support of Ben Gurion, managed to isolate 
those “moderate” elements which had grouped around Prime 
Minister Moshe Sharett, who had called for more restraint and 
for diplomatic channels to be used as well as military ones. Hay. 
ing pushed Sharett and his supporters aside, the military, which 
by this time had developed and coordinated plans for agegres. 
sion with France and Britain, received approval from the govern. 
ment to begin military operations against Egypt. The Israel; 
Ministry of Defence took the task of strengthening links with 
the Western allies on itself. It only became possible artificially 
to extend its functions, to the detriment of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, because it was especially important for Israel] 
to establish contact with those Western countries which could 
quickly supply it with weapons in the quantities required to fol- 
low an expansionist course and guarantee political support for 
such a course. The recommendations of professional military men 
naturally carried a lot of weight in these matters. 

On the eve of the 1967 aggression, the military, which had ex- 
pressed its solidarity with ultra-rightist forces, came out as a 
pressure group demanding that a war be quickly started. Having 
forced Defence Minister Levi Eshkol, whom they considered 
“not resolute enough”, to hand over Defence Minister portfolio 
to Moshe Dayan and attained a cabinet reshuffle to their lik- 
ing, military leaders there and then received the correspond- 
ing order from the government. As a result of the aggression, 
Israel occupied territory three times greater than its own. Three 
Arab countries were the victims of the aggression—Egypt, Syria 
and Jordan—and hundreds of thousands of Palestinian Arabs 
who had been driven from their homes on the West Bank of the 
Jordan, in the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights and on the Sinai 
Peninsula, all of which were captured by Israel, were added to 
the lines of refugees. Many of them were refugees for the second 
time. 

The idea of the army as the only guarantee of maintaining 
the state was fortified in the postwar euphoria in Israel, and the 
stances taken by military officers began to determine the whole 
complex of Israel’s relations with the Arab states to an even 
greater extent. The idea of “safe borders”, which the General 
Staff had developed after the 1967 aggression, amounted to 
the presence of well-fortified frontiers far from the country’s 


186 


vitally important centres supposedly being the main condition 
for ensuring national security. The tying-up of “security” prob- 
lems with the annexation of Arab territories fully suited the Is- 
raeli leaders and reinforced their total negativeness towards set- 
tling the Arab-Israeli conflict. Evaluations of the situation supplied 
by top military officers led the Israeli establishment to believe 
that Israel had events completely under control and that the 
“neither war nor peace” situation would continue for an indef- 
initely long time, thus answering Israel’s interests in the best 
way possible. ‘The process of active “settlement” of the occupied 
territories and the way the Israeli Government torpedoed all ini- 
tiatives on the Middle East led to the Arab countries taking mili- 
tary action in October 1973 to liberate the lands Israel had cap- 
tured. 

The October War essentially signified the downfall of the Is- 
raeli leadership’s military-strategic calculations and of the coun- 
try’s military-political doctrine. The myth that Israel could fully 
control the development of the Middle East situation was also 
dispelled. As a result of the military operations, Israel lost around 
4.000 and 6,000 were wounded. Materiel losses were around 250 
aircraft (or almost half the air force) and 900 tanks. 

The Israeli leaders needed some time to recover from the post- 
October shock, by means of the moral, economic and military aid 
of the USA. The wish to prevent the occupation of Palestinian 
lands being curtailed induced the Israeli leadership, on the one 
hand, to participate in separate discussions with Egypt under 
US mediation, and, on the other to intensify its policy of sup- 
pressing the Palestinian Resistance Movement. From the point 
of view of the Israeli rulers, acts of aggression against the PRM 
took on a special significance while international recognition was 
growing for the Palestine Liberation Organisation, which took a 
constructive position towards settling the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
Not only did Israel reject the possibility of the PLO taking part 
in the process of settling the Middle East conflict, it also contin- 
ued to reduce the Palestinian problem to one of refugees in order 
to prevent the Palestinian people from enjoying its inalienable 
right to self-determination. 

This line was reflected in Israel’s military operations against 
the PRM and the civilian Palestinian population—bombardments 
of refugee camps in Lebanon, the murder of Palestinian leaders, 


187 


the repression of PLO sympathisers on the West Bank and in 
the Gaza Strip, and the invasion of Southern Lebanon in 1978. 
The anti-Palestinian policy of Israel’s ruling circles reached jt, 
climax in 1982-1983 during the barbaric aggression against Le. 
banon. The military establishment played an enormous role ip 
developing and unleashing this aggression. 

The Israeli writer Uri Avneri believes that the war was foisted 
on Israel by Ariel Sharon and Rafael Eitan (the Minister of 
Defence and Chief of the General Staff) with the support of 
Menachem Begin.’? Of course, there is no reason to talk about 
the “passiveness” of other Zionist leaders. At the same time, the 
military bosses undoubtedly came out as the instigators and di. 
rect organisers of this military venture. 

It was precisely military officers who made a material contri- 
bution to securing both the military and political assistance of the 
USA. From this point of view the visit of E. Saguy, Chief of the 
Israeli Military Intelligence, to Washington in February 1982 was 
very important. Saguy met with Alexander Haig and Pentagon 
figures and informed them of the military operation being pre- 
pared against Lebanon. As the Israeli observer Zeev Schiff wrote, 
“In retrospect, this visit was clearly a first Israeli attempt to 
engage the United States as a partner in its plans for Lebanon.”™ 
This attempt to engage the United States was the very purpose 
of the visit, since by this time Washington already knew of Israel’s 
plans to start a large-scale war. The USA almost immediately 
agreed to sell Israel 75 F-16s and 11 F-15s, as well as to provide 
an additional $125 million in aid.™4 

Sharon met with Haig in mid-May and informed him that an 
Israeli military move against the PLO in Lebanon was likely to 
start at any moment—perhaps even during their conversation.” 
As subsequent events showed, the Israeli emissaries met with full 
understanding in Washington, which gave the green light to 
the barbaric Israeli aggression. 

The military establishment simultaneously took measures to 
place the working out of almost all military-political questions 
under its strict control, pushing the cabinet into the background. 
Sharon sanctioned the unprecedented extension of the Ministry 
of Defence department of the national security, which, along 
with the General Staff, was charged with carrying out 
major military and political tasks. 


188 


Crimes against. the civilian population of Lebanon and obvious 
abuse of power on the part of military leaders provoked such a 
strong negative reaction both abroad and in Israel itself that the 
ruling circles were forced to create a special commission of in- 
quiry into the circumstances of the carnage in the Palestinian 
refugee camps of Sabra and Chatila. The commission’s unfavour- 
able conclusions concerning Minister of Defense Sharon, Military 
Intelligence Chief Saguy, and Commander of the Israeli troops 
in Beirut Yaron led to their being removed from these positions. 
Not one of these generals, however, was dismissed from active 
service. Sharon remained in the cabinet and is a member of the 
two most important commissions—the Commission on Defence 
and the Commission on Israeli-Lebanese relations. Saguy was 
sent to Central America to discuss questions of supplying Israeli 
arms and of cooperation with reactionary fascist regimes, and 
Yaron was appointed chief of the personnel department for the 
General Staff. 

The fact that representatives of the military establishment 
successfully “survived” the commission’s conclusions and obtained 
responsible new positions is far from coincidental. It merely il- 
lustrates the enormous: influence of the military upper crust, 
whose activity ensures the stable influence of the armed forces 
on all aspects of Israeli life. We are talking both of high-ranking 
officers on active military service and of reserve officers who hold 
key positions in the political or economic field and have main- 
tained their clan links with the army. 

Since the end of the 1960s the number of political appoint- 
ments among high-ranking reserve officers has been increasing 
sharply. Rearrangements also go on among representatives of 
the High Command who had earlier left the army. For example, 
Haim Herzog, who was appointed as a director of a large com- 
pany in 1962, was later Israel’s representative in the UN, and 
in March 1983 was elected President of Israel. At the same time, 
many high-ranking officers are actively involved in various polit- 
ical parties, although they do not have any official positions in 
this. 

After demobilisation, a high-ranking officer’s choice of career 
is to a significant extent determined by the position he held in the 
army. The generals and the High Command represent the most 
conservative part of the army and, in fact, belong to the ruling 


189 


Zionist elite. The question of a new appointment is, as a rule 
decided while a general is still on active military service. Taking 
the exclusiveness of elite groupings in Israel and their typical ne. 
potism into account, it can be said that their representatives, in- 
cluding the military, have the opportunity to exert not only di- 
rect but also indirect influence over the course of events in vari- 
ous spheres of state life by using family and service contacts, 

When they leave the army high-ranking officers continue to 
be its representatives even in civilian life. They are called up 
when the need arises and often return to the army at the request 
of political leaders interested in guaranteeing themselves sup- 
port in the military command. Amongst the latest examples we 
can cite D. Ivri, who was appointed Deputy Chief of Staff by 
Moshe Arens, the present Minister of Defence. In December 
1982, Ivri, the former commander of the air force, went into the 
reserve and headed the IAI company. Arens, who had become 
Minister of Defence, persuaded him to return. 

The role of the military as the guides and architects of Is- 
raeli policy showed itself most clearly in the occupied territories, 
where the army not only comes out as the executor of the de- 
cisions taken by the country’s Zionist leadership, but also de- 
termines the specific content of these decisions. The Israeli lead- 
ers, having set the establishment of “Greater Israel” as their 
goal, strained every effort to annex the Arab territories captured 
in 1967. In August 1980, they declared Jerusalem the “eternal 
and indivisible capital of Israel”, and in December 1981, the 
Knesset extended Israeli jurisdiction to the Golan Heights, which 
belonged to Syria, signifying their practical annexation. The rul- 
ing Zionist bosses are also carrying out similar plans on the West 
Bank and in the Gaza Strip. 

As we have already noted, expansionism is organically inherent 
in Zionism and to a decisive extent determines Israel’s aggressive 
acts in the region. The expansionist line in Israeli policy showed 
itself most vividly after the ultra-right Likud bloc headed by 
Menachem Begin came to power in 1977. Begin, a former ter- 
rorist and supporter of the racist ideas of V. Jabotinsky, the 
leader of the Revisionist Party, repeatedly pointed out that he 
considered the goal of his whole life to be the unlimited terri- 
torial expansion of Israel. He picked himself a team capable 
of guaranteeing the fastest realisation of this “dream”. The lead- 


190 


ing role in this team was to be played by Minister of Defence 
Sharon. 

The return to Egypt of the Sinai in accordance with the Camp 
David accords and the Egyptian-Israeli Separate Deal was viewed 
by extremist circles in Israel as ‘“‘payment” for the annexation 
of territories on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip which 
were of far greater importance for them. The ground had already 
been prepared for this annexation. In 1967 a military occupation 
regime had been established on the captured lands and they be- 
gan actively to be “settled”—settlements and military instal- 
lations were built, roads were laid, measures were taken to change 
the Arab nature of individual regions and sectors, and the 
local Arab population was forced out. The West Bank and the 
Gaza Strip gradually turned into an economic appendage to 
Israel. 

The military took part in the development and implementation 
of the occupation policy on two levels. On the first level high- 
ranking officers who held important governmental posts were 
drawn into the development of the strategic directions of Israel’s 
course of occupation. The military bosses were the authors or 
the co-authors of the Israeli leadership’s plans for the captured 
Arab territories. The most known amongst these were the Dayan 
Plan, the Allon Plan and the Begin Plan. Sharon, Weizmann, 
and Dayan directly took part in formulating the main provisions 
of the latter. It is not so much the formal affiliation of the au- 
thors of these designs to the army that is significant—they are all 
military professionals (with the exception of Begin) and all hold 
the rank of general—but the fact that these plans, in the words 
of their creators, above all serve to carry out military-strategic 
tasks (guaranteeing “strategic depth”, “defensible borders”, etc.). 
It is clear that the question of creating military advantages for 
Israel] at the cost of capturing foreign land goes beyond purely 
military problems and acquires a deep political meaning. In par- 
ticular, the Begin Plan, which was embraced by Sadat at Camp 
David and recorded in the Camp David documents and the 
appendix to the Egyptian-Israeli Separate Deal, envisaged set- 
ting up “autonomous self-rule” on the West Bank and in the 
Gaza Strip. It particularly emphasised that “autonomy” would 
be realised under strict Israeli military control and that Israeli 
troops would not be withdrawn but merely be redeployed to 


191 


“specially qualified regions to ensure security”. In this way, hid. 
ing behind the phraseology of the need to “ensure security”, the 
Zionist leaders are trying to maintain a permanent military pre- 
sence in the Arab lands charged with preventing the very pos. 
sibility of their being separated from Israel at some time in the 
future. 

On the second level—the direct activity of the army in the 
occupied territories—there were confiscations of land, building 
work was carried out, the protests of the local Arab population 
were suppressed, and there were various punitive actions. The 
joining to Israel of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip could 
not be realised by direct annexation and, as the Israeli leaders 
thought, required preparation. Firstly, it required a sharp reduc- 
tion in the local Arab population and an increase in the Israelj 
presence in order not to upset the demographic balance of the 
country in the future, something which could cause the Zion- 
ist idea of a single-nationality state to fail. Secondly, it was nec- 
essary to establish a new administration structure for the captured 
regions and attract Arab quislings (i.e. collaborationists). 
Thirdly, the influence and position of the PLO had to be under- 
mined. 

In order to achieve these goals the Israeli Government some- 
what moved the accent in its policy on the West Bank and the 
Gaza Strip, which had been developed and implemented with the 
help of the army and the Ministry of Defence. Sharon, who was 
also a member of the Committee on Settlements, played a key 
role in the formation of the course of occupation. He declared 
that there was a place for the Palestinian Arab state on the East 
Bank of the Jordan. The Defence Mimnister’s logic is clear: the 
Palestinian Arabs should actively be forced out into Jordan. This 
policy is being implemented by the Israeli authorities—around 
30,000 people are forced to leave the West Bank each year, and 
there is talk of an intensification of this policy. 

The most important direction of the Israeli military’s activity 
is repression of the local Arab authorities, of town mayors, of 
members of municipal councils, and of influential political fig- 
ures. This repression reflects the desire of the Israeli ruling circles 
to weaken the Palestinian leadership as much as possible and to 
set it off against their own protégés. At the same time, in an at- 
tempt to lessen the opposition of local forces, Sharon, having an- 


192 


nounced the introduction of “civil administration”, resorted in 
1981 to a new pretext for the regime of military government. 
He did not fool anyone—as before, the Israeli military authori- 
ties are, in fact, conducting all affairs on the West Bank and in 
the Gaza Strip. The attempts of the military authorities to limit 
the influence of the PLO and isolate its sympathisers by means 
of repression, intimidation and terror also failed. The Israeli pol- 
icy in the occupied territories provoked the most embittered op- 
position of the local population since 1967 in the form of an 
uprising in the spring of 1982. 

The Zionist leadership believed that, in these conditions, the 
PLO had to be defeated and its military and political positions 
undermined if the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were'to be 
annexed. Thus, the logic of the Israeli occupation led to the 
Lebanese tragedy. Addressing the Israeli troops in Lebanon in the 
summer of 1982, Rafael Eitan stressed that the war represented 
a “once-in-a-generation opportunity to change conditions in our 
favour in the struggle over Evetz Yisrael” (i.e. Great Israel, 
which included vast Arab territories) .?° 

Pursuing its expansionist goals in the region, Israel simultan- 
eously comes out as a guide for imperialist policy in the Mid- 
dle East. As it is known, the USA is trying to turn the Middle 
East into a zone of its undivided rule. In order to do this it ‘is 
trying to weaken progressive Arab régimes and movements and 
to undermine the prestige and influence of the Soviet Union. 
In conditions when the significance of the Middle East has 
grown sharply in the USA’s strategic plans for deepening the con- 
frontation with the USSR both on a global and a regional level, 
the significance of the US-Israeli alliance: has grown even more, 
and Israel’s role in implementing US imperialist..designs has 
also become broader. Washington considers Israel to be a most 
loyal and stable ally; and Israel’s military machine, which was 
created with the help of the USA, allows the White House 
to use Israeli military might in its own interests without re- 
placing it, but merely by supplementing it with its own military 
presence.. 

On the whole, the Israeli invasion of Lebanon undoubtedly 
corresponded to the interests of Washington. It was aimed at 
weakening the advance detachments of the Arab national libera- 
tion movement, opened up possibilities for the framework of 


193 


Camp David to be expanded by the inclusion of Lebanon, ang 
could severely damage the front of Arab states opposing Js. 
rael—from which Egypt had already been dismissed because 
of the Camp David deal,—lead to an intensification of American 
military involvement in the Middle East, and weaken the in. 
fluence of the USSR. 

The Israeli aggression against Lebanon was carried out against 
the background of a new stage of development of American. 
Israeli military-political links. In November 1981, the USA signed 
the Memorandum on Mutual Understanding in the Sphere 
of Strategic Cooperation with Israel. The trend to formalise the 
American-Israeli alliance had appeared a long time previously 
and was reflected in a number of joint memoranda on the mili- 
tary-political sphere which were formulated with the active par- 
ticipation of the Israeli military bosses. At the same time, the 
memorandum on strategic cooperation gave American-Israeli 
relations new characteristics. The extreme anti-Soviet direction 
of the document bears witness to the USA’s intention to make 
even greater use of Israel and its armed forces to realise its strat- 
egy of putting pressure upon the world national liberation anti- 
imperialist movement and the socialist community. Although 
this memorandum was frozen by the USA in response to the de- 
cision of the Israeli authorities to annex the Golan Heights, which 
it captured from Syria in 1967, this did not have any influence 
on American-Israeli relations. This move on the part of Washing- 
ton was dictated merely by considerations of American ma- 
noeuvring in the Arab world. At the end of 1983, the United 
States, having taken a big gamble on using military force in the 
Middle East, finally formalised its military-political links with 
Israel by concluding a new strategic agreement. It envisages 
creating a joint military committee to coordinate operations 
more precisely, carrying out manoeuvres, stockpiling American 
weapons and ammunition on Israeli territory, increasing the 
amount of free military aid, and the resumption of supplies of 
the latest types of weaponry. Consequently, the Israeli military 
command and the military establishment as a whole are gaining 
the possibility of broadening their role in the development and 
implementation of the aggressive course of the Zionist rulers of 
Israel, who, ignoring the real interests of their country, have 
turned it into the gendarme of the Middle East and condemned 


194 


their people to living in conditions of permanent military ten- 
sion. 

However, despite the fact that Israel has been turned into a 
military camp by the Zionists, and despite the wild outburst of 
chauvinism and the cultivation of the population in a spirit of 
racism and intolerance, which is also being carried out in the 
army, voices of protest against the adventuristic policy of the 
ruling circles are heard in Israel. The government for the first 
time failed to reach a consensus in the country on a nationalistic 
basis during the military operations. To a certain extent the con- 
sequences of the Lebanese war also influenced Prime Minister 
Begin’s decision to retire, although he tried to leave his position 
to his party associate and terrorist colleague, Moshe Shamir. 

The war in Lebanon also provoked protests amongst the Israeli 
population. Thousands of people came out onto the streets de- 
manding an end to the bloody slaughter. Their number included 
junior officers and soldiers who had returned from Lebanon, as 
well as reservists. 

Israel’s progressive forces, headed by the Communist Party of 
Israel, are carrying on their struggle in the difficult conditions 
of domination by the military and the unlimited power of the 
ruling Zionist circles. As events in Lebanon have shown, how- 
ever, the trend to evaluate Israeli policy realistically is little by 
little making headway. 


References 


1. The Middle East, March 1983, No. 101, p. 18. 


2. See The ABC of the Palestine Problem 1896-1949, Beirut, 
1969, p. 9. 


3. Quoted in: Christopher Sykes, Crossroads to Israel, the 
World Publishing Co., Cleveland and New York, 1965, 
pp. 10-11. 


4. The ABC of the Palestine Problem 1896-1949, p. 9. 


5. See Report and General Statement of the Census of 1922, 
Jerusalem, 1922, p. 3. 


6. See A Survey of Palestine, Vol. I, Palestine, 1946, p. 244. 


195 


. The Arab East and Maghrib, Moscow, 1977, p. 182 (in 


Russian). 


8. The ABC of the Palestine Problem 1896-1949, p. 15. 


. M. Bar-Zohar, The Armed Prophet. A Biography of Ben 


Gurion, London, 1976, p. 59. 


. Ibid., p. 140. 


. Nahum Goldmann, Ov va Israél?, Calmann-Lévy, Paris, 


1975, pp. 53-54. 


. See Israel and Palestine Political Report, June 16, 1982, 


No. 91, p. 7. 


. Foreign Policy, No. 50, Spring 1983, p. 79. 
. The Middle East, July 1982, No. 93, p. 6. 
. Foreign Policy, No. 50, Spring 1983, p. 80. 
. Ibid., p. 54. 


